---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
competency: |
    Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
    is able to design instructional programs based on learning principles
    and theories.
csl: 'apa.csl'
title: Competency K
...

Meaning and Articulation of Competency
--------------------------------------

In many ways, library professionals can be considered like teachers. Our
central purpose of connecting users with information is often so that
those users can learn from that information. A central philosophy among
many librarians for decades has been to teach at the desk, instructing
users on the skills they need to navigate information systems and find
information for themselves, rather than to simply give the answers to
them. Many library programs and services are explicitly instructional in
nature. And, of course, school librarians must usually be teachers in
fact as well as in practice. As well, information professionals are
often in a position where they must train others within their
organization. With so much instruction being performed, it is important
for it to be done right. To be a successful instructor, a library
professional must understand the learning styles of the students, their
developmental levels, and must have the skills to teach them
effectively.

Preparation and Evidence
------------------------

Much of my knowledge of instruction comes from experience. During my
undergraduaFinally, I build familiarity with the concepts I am teaching
by demonstrating how to Hot shelve for them, and then having everyone in
the class get up and Hot shelve one section of the department for
themselves. te education, I worked as a writing tutor for the English
department of my school, and a great deal of the training for this
position was concerned with recognizing the learning styles of our
students. More recently, I have become on of the go-to trainers at the
retail store where I work, and I am often called upon to take new hires
through our beginning training, and to teach veterans the details of new
systems as the become available. So far, this experience has always been
with adults and older teens, and I have picked up from experience
several techniques for instructing different kinds of learners.

This experience has been supplemented with coursework on the theories of
learning development that I have completed since I began my MLIS. With
this combination of experience and instruction, I have chosen three
pieces of evidence to show my mastery of this competency. The first is a
proposal for one month of Storytime programming for a library children's
department, with goals and outcomes. The second is a plan for a training
session, intended to show fellow library workers how to "hot" shelve
materials in the teen collection. The third is blog post I created for
an online instruction package, with suggestions and techniques for
writing research essays.

### First Piece of Evidence: One Month Storytime Proposal, LIBR 260A

<aside>

[One-Month Storytime Plan]({{ site.url }}/evidence/libr260a/storytime/)

</aside>

In the Spring of 2012 I took a course on Programs and Services for
Children. Because of the greater instructional needs of children, and
because of the high number of school librarians in the class, this
course has a strong focus on child mental development and learning
strategies. We were taught that nearly any program we give or service we
offer to children could have a positive effect on their growth, and so
we should always keep in mind the best practices for children's
development and interest. One of the main projects of this course was to
create a One-Month plan with the details of a Storytime program that we
could implement in our own libraries. I created my Storytime plan with a
constant eye toward how it could support the learning and development of
the children who attended.

The design of the individual programs, aimed at specific age groups, was
built from theories about child cognitive and physical development, as
described by Cerny, Markey, & Williams (2006). The "Baby & Me" lapsit
story times use rhythm, rhyme, and music to encourage early language and
sensory development, and parents are required as their "gateway" to the
world. The later Toddler story times maintains the rhythm and rhyme, but
begins to add crafts and activities that allow children to continue
developing their motor skills, and the stories used are a bit more
complicated. The 'Family" story time has even more activities to keep
older children from becoming bored, and to allow them to assert
themselves on their environment, while encouraging them to follow
instructions to build the weekly craft.

The week by week activity chart gives even more detail, showing how each
activity encourages the development of children at that age. The use of
bright and visually interesting books for storytelling encourages
children's Print Awareness, with several talking points throughout to
build their Print Motivation (and get parents involved, as well).
Several varied and vocal songs are used to help develop children's
Phonological Awareness, so they can recognized certain sounds as parts
of words or not, and for older children another song supports Letter
Awareness as they begin reading. Several songs describe the world and
things in it to help increase children's Vocabulary. Finally, the
follow-along finger plays help build children's awareness of Narrative,
helping to prepare them for more complex stories and reading to come. I
built each part of the plan with a mind toward how it can encourage the
development of the children who attend.

A knowledge of child development vital for anyone who works closely with
young children. The youngest among us are always learning, and it is our
duty to encourage that learning in whatever way we can. As we design the
programs and services for children, we need to keep in mind their
development and how will affect their engagement in the program. This is
important not just for the ideal reason of helping to improve the lives
of our patrons, but also the much more practical reason of keeping the
children interested and entertained.

I have not yet had the opportunity to put these theories into practice,
with instructional or entertaining services for children. I am
confident, though, that I have a solid theoretical foundation for
designing programs that children will find entertaining, and that will
encourage and support their development. Of course, designing such a
program and implementing it are very different things. For now, I feel
it is important to always treat children with respect and equality, and
that includes tailoring my answers to them so as to be understandable
based on their level of development, and to encourage their growth and
learning with these answers and the resources they point to.

### Second Piece of Evidence: Training Session Plan, LIBR 261A

<aside>

[Outline for Training Session]({{ site.url }}/evidence/libr261a/training-outline/)

</aside>

After the class with Programming for Children, the following semester,
the Fall of 2012, I attended a similar class with Programming and
Services for Young Adults. This course was less focused on instructing
teens, and more on advocating for them. One project was to create a plan
and outline for a brief training session that could be conducted for
other library staff members, with a topic of instruction based on one of
the earlier topics from the class, with the intention of building
respect for teens and encouraging the success of a project for their
benefit. I chose the topic of "Hot" shelving, which involves shelving
library materials in unexpected ways, and with the addition of graphics
and color, in order to build interest in the collection from teens. This
is inspired in part on techniques used by retail bookstores, as well as
by common practice of teenagers when decorating their own bedrooms.

I have conducted a great number of training sessions similar to this
activity in my work as a retail supervisor, and I brought that
experience to this exercise in my design of the activities used to
garner interest from the class. The specifics of the instruction, the
actions and activities that are to be performed, are intended to grab
the classroom's attention immediately, and never let go. Keller (1987)
described a design for instructional programs and training sessions that
is built based on people's learning styles and ways to motivate them,
and the first part of this ARCS model is *Attention*. I use sound
recordings, discussion, movement, roleplaying, and physically getting up
and acting on the instructions I am giving in order to stimulate
interest and prevent anyone from drifting off. There is nothing worse
for a training session, I have learned, than a class that falls asleep.

I then use the training session to build *Relevance* for the class in
several ways. I connect the goal of the training with the goals of the
library, which should also be the goals of the staff, by pointing out
how teens are often dissatisfied with "standard" shelving practices. I
increase this relevance by encouraging to match their own motives to
those of teens, by attempting to think like a teen (if they are not one
any longer) and looking at the teen collection from their point of view.
Finally, I build familiarity with the concepts I am teaching by
demonstrating how to Hot shelve for them, and then having everyone in
the class get up and Hot shelve one section of the department for
themselves.

Finally, I include clear outcomes, and ways to measure those outcomes,
as an integral part of the training plan. With any sort of training or
instruction, goals or desired outcomes are necessary, even if only to
say "my students will learn how to *blank*". Like any other program or
service used in an information organization, there is a reason for
conducting a training session. Usually it is because there is some
service that is not being performed, or some need that is not being
filled. Simply teaching and forgetting will give no guarantee that this
reason is being met. A library professional, as a part of the design of
a training or instruction program, must include both the desired
outcomes of the training, and a way to measure the results to determine
if those outcomes are fulfilled. This training plan includes both short
term and long term measurements, with the goal of increasing teen usage
and teen satisfaction of the Young Adult collection as a result of
implementing Hot Shelving.

I have shown here that I can design training sessions that are
effective, and that can benefit a library by their use. I have
experienced first hand how to give an effective training class, and I am
sure I will continue to put this knowledge into practice as I continue
my career in an information organization. The motivational model I have
used helps to increase interest and attention, with the result that more
of the instruction is retained and put to use. I understand better than
ever before how to apply this theory to a practical instruction program,
and I plan to put this to use in designing training and instruction that
benefits all users of my organization.

### Third Piece of Evidence: Writing Instruction Blog Post, LIBR 210

<aside>

[8 Steps to Writing a Paper]({{ site.url }}/evidence/libr210/8-steps/)

</aside>

Not all training and instruction is able to happen in person. While
one-on-one instruction is usually the most effective, sometimes it is
not appropriate, or even possible, for this to occur. This was the
motivation for one of the projects in my Introduction to Reference
Services course from the Spring of 2012. I was part of a group who were
to create a Bibliographic Instruction Package, a package of material
with which we could instruct an audience on some skill, without needing
or being able to teach them directly. My group decided to create a
Tumblr blog, called "Write to Survive," that was aimed at a young adult
audience and instructed them in different research and academic writing
skills. We each created pages for the blog separately, and one of the
pages I created was a step-by-step account of best practices for writing
a research paper for class.

For the instructions I did my best to make no assumptions about what the
audience already knows or does not know, except that they know they have
to write a paper. I also made no assumptions about the content or type
of paper, whether analytical, expository, or persuasive. My goal was
simply to give an overview of what I understand to be a successful
writing process. The process is not directly based on any previous work,
it is simply the process that I use for my own writing, and with which I
have so far had a great deal of success.

I attempted again to follow, as much as possible, Keller's (1987)
motivational model of instruction, though this is considerably more
difficult with and direct interaction. Nonetheless, I made use of his
suggested strategies for maintaining attention and interest. With each
of the steps, I give specific examples of what is needed in that step,
demonstrating "Concreteness", and I use humor throughout to make it more
fun. With more time (and resources) more of Keller's strategies could be
employed by the use of sound and animation, and through interactive
sections, but that is beyond what I could for this assignment.

I also attempted to take into account the different learning styles
described by Kolb (1984), though I do not believe I was as successful as
I would have liked. I tried to accommodate both Abstract learners by
describing the concept of each step, and Concrete learners by giving
specific examples of what is needed from each step. The instructions can
also be used by both Reflective Observers who can ponder how the steps
interact, and Active Experimenters who would want to try to create
something along every step of the way. Still, the learning styles are
not accommodated equally. I believe it would work best for learners that
Kolb describes as Convergers, who would appreciate the more abstract
concepts that are described, but would still wish to actively create
something for each step and concept. If I were to revisit this
instruction, I would want to revise it so that the other learning styles
are represented more fully.

With this instruction outline, I have demonstrated that I can apply
learning concepts and styles even without direct interaction with a
learner, though it is certainly more difficult and less clear cut. I
have discovered an affinity for online instruction and research guides,
so I am sure that I will be creating more instruction packages and pages
in the future. When I do, I will always keep the different learning
styles in mind, so that different people can still find use in whatever
guide I create. As in all that I do, I will also stay on the lookout for
more effective theories and strategies for this kind of instructional
page.

Future Application
------------------

As I stated above, all information science can be considered a kind of
instructional field. Librarians and other information professionals
teach, train, and instruct every day, whether that means in a full
structures class or simply a quick tip about searching the catalog.
Different patrons, though, learn in different ways, and we cannot assume
that any type of instruction will fit all learners. I can design
programs that support learning and development, and I can design
resources that can instruct more directly, and I know that I can conduct
an effective training class. I will bring that experience and that
conviction to whatever position I find myself in, and do my best to
support the learning of all of my clients and colleagues.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Cerny, R., Markey, P., & Williams, A. (2006). *Outstanding library
service to childen: Putting the core competencies to work*. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.

Keller, J. M. (1987). Development and use of the ARCS model of
instrucational design. *Journal of Instructional Development*, *10*(3),
2–10.

Kolb, D. A. (1984). *Experiential learning*. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

</div>
