---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
competency: |
    Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
    is able to use the basic concepts and principles related to the
    selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of physical and
    digital items and collections.
csl: 'apa.csl'
title: Competency F
...

Meaning and Articulation of Competency
--------------------------------------

If the core purpose of information professionals is to connect users
with information, then it follows that we must have information with
which to connect our users. All information organizations have a
collection of sort, and this collection is never perfect or complete.
Information professionals, then, must be able find new materials and
resources, choose the ones that best fit their organizations' collection
policies, and gain access to those materials for the use of their
clients. LIS professionals must also be capable of repeating the same
process for materials that are already part of the collection,
justifying materials to keep and removing those that are no longer
needed. We must be able to organize the collection we already have and
to fit new items into that collection, so that the resources we have can
be accessed and used by our clients. Finally, we must know how to
maintain the resources over time, so that they are still accessible and
usable years or decades in the future.

Preparation and Evidence
------------------------

Before beginning my MLIS coursework, my knowledge of this competency was
haphazard and limited. To some extent, I thought that libraries tried to
acquire everything they could get, and tried to keep everything that
they had. For most libraries, of course, this is impractical, nor is it
desirable, as not all information resources are created equal. In a
sense I did have experience selecting and acquiring materials, at least
in the sense that I have built my personal library, and have even had to
weed it on occasion to remove books that I no longer need and for which
I do not have room. I also have some experience with preservation, as
during my undergraduate education I worked as a clerk in the university
library, and one of my occasional duties was to mend books that had been
damaged, but were not so far gone that they must be replaced. Still,
none of my experience was as ordered or defined as what I would learn in
my coursework.

I have chosen three pieces of evidence to show how I have since mastered
the concepts of this competency. The first is an analysis of the
collection of a local public library, and how it is meeting the needs of
the library's users. The second is a "toolbox" of materials and
resources that I have evaluated for building the teen services and
collection of a library. The third is the final exam for my Archives and
Manuscripts class, in which I explore the challenges of newer technology
in archival work, and the conflict that exists between preservation and
access of materials.

### First Piece of Evidence: Collection Analysis, LIBR 266

In the Spring of 2013 I attended a course devoted to the different
aspects and challenges of Collection Development. One project for this
course was to thoroughly analyze the collection of a library or other
information organization, in context with the community and user base
that the organization serves. For this assignment, I chose the Roseville
Public Library, a large public library of which I have been a patron for
two years. Though I have usually been able to find what I need at the
Roseville library, I have often felt that the library seemed to be
missing a few things, and sometimes felt dissatisfied with the way in
which the collection was organized. With this project, I was able to put
these feelings into words, and discover exactly what about the library's
collection made me think it needed to be improved.

The analysis begins with a brief description of the neighborhood and
demographics. Any analysis of a collection must take into account the
users for whom the collection has been created, and the users whom the
organization serves. Usage data, as well, can be used to find the gaps
or limitations of a library collection. I found that the Roseville
library has a clear disparity between its children's and teen
collections, with young adults having a much smaller part of the
collection despite making up an equal part of the population. Even
worse, though, is an almost total lack of foreign language materials and
foreign interest material, even though the community has a large
population of both recent and second generation immigrants. Both parts
of the collection need to be developed further.

I also found weaknesses in the way certain parts of the collection were
organized, both within the library system and physically on the shelves.
The multimedia sections of the collection, the music recording and movie
DVDs, both make up a disproportionately large part of the circulation of
the library's collection. The classification schemes used for these
collections add almost no useful organization, and do not end up helping
users to find items. The library's print fiction is separated into
genres, similar to the categories used in a bookstore, a scheme that is
welcome and familiar to users, but the DVDs are only organized
alphabetically by title, with no other indication in the order or
organization about the contents of each film. The music is classified
within the Dewey Decimal numbers, which should at least partly organize
them by genre or type, but in practice only does so in very broad ways.
Worse, though, is how these collections are shelved. Both collections
are crammed into too small a space and oriented so that most of the
items are hidden behind others, and none of the call numbers are
visible, making these sections incredibly difficult to browse and all
but impossible to search.

In practice a collection analysis such as this would only be the first
step toward improving the collection. Following the guidelines suggested
by Durusau (2000), any collection should be regularly evaluated in order
to maintain its usefulness to its users, both by identifying gaps to be
filled, and finding opportunities to weed items that are no longer
necessary. For the Roseville library, gaps exist in the young adult
collection and the foreign language collection, both of which should be
developed based on overall trends and the specific needs of the patrons
in Roseville's neighborhood. A larger project would be to reorganize the
media collections, reclassifying if possible in order to convey more
information about the contents of the items, and reshelving for certain
in order to make all items visible and findable for users. This would
strengthen the collection as a whole and, based on the evaluation, would
improve both circulation numbers and client satisfaction with the
library collection.

I have seen from this exercise that collection is a continuous process,
and one that goes beyond simply acquiring new materials. For a
successful collection, a library professional must be able to identify
the needs of that collection, which really means identifying the needs
of the users of that collection. This can also mean identifying areas
where the collection has the right items, but they are not presented in
a way to make them findable, or even where the collection has more items
than it needs and can make room by deselecting materials. The strength
of an information organization is often built upon the strength of its
collection of information resources and materials. I will take this
lesson with me, then, that the development of a collection is never
complete.

### Second Piece of Evidence: Teen Services Toolbox, LIBR 261A

The overview of Programming and Services for Young Adults I attended in
the Fall of 2012 had a strong interest in the resources and materials to
support these services, both resources for the YA collection and
resources of use to YA librarians. One project in particular focused on
this aspect of service with the development of a librarian's "Toolbox",
an evaluation of different resources that can be used by YA librarians,
and specifically comparing similar resources to each other in order to
find which ones are most useful. The relevance of this project to this
competency is twofold. First, it is an example of evaluating resources
for inclusion, and using this evaluation to select only the most useful
materials when library resources do not allow for collecting everything.
Second, the toolbox itself includes resources for building a Teen
collection in the library, examples of the tools needed to select and
acquire the right materials for a collection.

Resource evaluation is important not only for an existing collection,
but also for new materials that you might wish to add to a collection.
Both funds and space are limited, after all, and for most institutions
it is simply impossible to acquire all materials that they would like to
purchase. Most purchases must be justified. This toolbox, then, serves
as an example of how I have evaluated a variety of materials for
inclusion in a collection. I focus as much as I can on broad
applicability, preferring materials that can be used in more than one
context, but I also pay attention to the depth in which the material
covers a particular topic. An item that is focused and specific can
often be a better resource than one that is broad but shallow. Each
evaluation, then, shows the thought put into selecting a particular
item, while passing up another.

The last several items reviewed are themselves tools to be used in
selecting materials for a collection. I am following Disher (2007) in
his section on materials selection, as he points out that in a library
setting, it is usually impossible to read and evaluate each potential
acquisition personally, and often each item must be researched by way of
critical reviews to see if it is worth purchasing. More and more
materials are being released---and subsequently requested by library
clients---that are not included in traditional review sources, though,
especially materials for young adults. These last items, then, are
possible resources for reviews needed to find and justify items for a
young adult collection.

Just like the other items in the toolbox, I prioritized broad appeal and
depth over sheer quantity of reviews. Of the two books evaluated, both
containing suggestions for a core collection of young adult materials, I
recommend one based on this criteria. While one resource is largely made
up of lists of items, with little discussion about the items themselves
or why they are important, the other goes into depth about each covered
category, describing the most important or influential items within
those categories while also giving enough background to help judge new
materials based on the history of its category. Similarly, with both the
print and web-based tools I recommend the resource that reviews
materials of all formats and genres, and does not limit itself to books
alone. More than any other group of users, young adults are consumers of
all kinds of materials, from books to movies to music, as well as video
games and even online-only materials that are difficult to fit into any
traditional category. A librarian acquiring materials for a young adult
audience must remember this, and must use review tools that remember
this as well.

In my career ahead, and will almost certainly end up in a situation
where I need to select new material, and justify my selections to my
superiors. I am prepared, then, to evaluate materials based not only on
reviews and external resources, but also in comparison to similar
materials, so that I can show I have chosen the most appropriate items
to acquire for my organization. Choosing the right materials depends on
both knowing the audience, and knowing what is available, and will
nearly always require the use of outside tools to make the best
decisions. With this experience, I can show that I know how to find the
tools to make those decisions.

### Third Piece of Evidence: Final Exam (Archives), LIBR 256

My final piece of evidence for this competency comes from my class on
Archives and Manuscripts, which I took over the Summer of 2013.
Collection development in an archival environment is very different from
that same task in a traditional library, but it nonetheless follows the
same principles of selection and acquisition, organization, and
preservation. I explored a few different aspect of these skills in the
final exam for the course, written as two essay responses to open ended
questions about the archival profession. For this exam, I chose to
describe first what I saw as the challenges in archival collections that
come about because of the rapid rise and increasing use of new
information technologies, and second to show the balance needed between
the often conflicting goals of preserving materials, and offering access
to those materials.

Information technology is rapidly changing both archival practice in
many instances, and user perceptions of archives in many more. There is
a growing expectation among the public that materials should be
accessible online, though most do not realize what a nightmare it can be
to digitize, store, and organize materials from physical copies.
Digitization can be useful for preservation, creating a copy of a
material that can be easily and safely copied and transfered, but then
again most storage media can survive only a fraction of the time that
most physical copies can, and many older archival materials are now too
fragile to scan into a computer in the first place. Combined with the
great expense involved, most archives cannot digitize their collection
even if they would like to, as described by Kastellec (2012). Born
digital records avoid this problem, but create a new one in the question
of what constitutes a record, and how to organize the data. Many such
items are difficult to categorize or classify, as they are not easily
recognizable as a "record", and they resist easy organization. The fact
remains, though, the digital records and collections are becoming
unavoidable, and a major part of the information landscape, though in my
response to this question I do not find any easy answers.

The matter of preservation, as I explore in the second question, is one
that is much more prominent in archival collections than in other kinds
of information systems. While most libraries only do enough preservation
work to avoid having to replace copies---stronger binding and frequent
mending, for example---archives and special collections are concerned
with keeping original resources in as pristine a condition as possible,
while also allowing access to researchers. Archives are likely to do
much more with a single items, from chemical treatments to vacuum
sealing, in order to keep them intact, though again this is for the
purpose of subsequent use. Information that is preserved without
allowing any access can certainly survive longer, but is useless.
Digitization, as described above, can help with both preservation and
access, if the expense is allowed. When it is not available, though, a
balance must be struck between allowing access to materials, and
protecting those materials.

After seeing the lengths that archival collections must go to in order
to preserve their collections, preservation in more traditional library
settings seems significantly easier in comparison. As I continue in my
career, I will always balance the need to preserve materials with the
need of users to access those materials. Even in the most strict of
archival environments, information is only preserved so that it can
later be used, and an archivist protects his collection so that it can
later be connected to the user that needs those records. We must never
try to hoard the items we preserve to such an extent that they cannot
then be accessed, or else we may as well not collect them at all.

Future Application
------------------

There is no point in trying to connect users to information if there is
no information available, and so any information organization will have
a collection to be used. The challenge, then, will be to build and
develop that collection, to revisit and even reduce it if needed, and to
organize and preserve the materials within it so that users can continue
to access the information for a long time to come. I will face these
challenges no matter what sort of information organization I eventually
join, as they are an integral part of all LIS work. I have a strong
foundation in all of the major principles of collection development,
though I am still developing my skills in each specific area, and I am
confident that I can meet these challenges in my career to come, whether
that involves building specialized a library department for a specific
audience, sorting through web-based materials for online organization,
or piecing together century-old documents in an archives. Either way,
the principles remain the same.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Disher, W. (2007). *Crash course in colelction development*. Westport,
CT: Libraries Unlimited.

Durusau, C. (2000). Collection development and maintenance. *Georgia
Library Quarterly*, *37*(2), 36–37.

Kastellec, M. (2012). Practical limits to the scope of digital
preservation. *Information Technology and Libraries*, *31*(2), 63–71.

</div>
