---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
competency: |
    Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
    is able to describe and compare the organizational settings in which
    library and information professionals practice.
csl: 'apa.csl'
title: Competency B
...

Meaning and Articulation of Competency
--------------------------------------

The MLIS degree is intended to prepare for a profession with the field
of Information Science, but this field is wide and varied, and no two
organizations are exactly alike. Traditionally this degree was intended
for librarians, but this has since expanded to many different kinds of
organizations, some of which have little in common at first glance with
a library. Even those that are at first glance similar have different
organizational structures, different environmental factors, and
different challenges to face in their day to day operation. Public
libraries do not work in the same way as school libraries, which do not
work the same way as university libraries, which do not work the same as
archival institutions, which are different from private information
brokers. To be fully prepared for the field, an information professional
must understand the similarities and differences between these
organizations.

Preparation and Evidence
------------------------

I came into the MLIS program aware that there were different types of
information organizations, with with little knowledge about what
characteristics set them apart from one another. I have, of course,
visited public libraries countless times throughout my life, and during
my undergraduate education there were times when I practically lived at
the university library. Still, other than these experiences, my first
true introduction to the differences between information organizations
came in the coursework I have done during this program. I have chosen
three assignments out of this coursework to demonstrate the
understanding I have since gained about the different---and
similar---challenges faced by information organizations. The first is a
report of a site visit of a local public library, which included
interviews with members of the library staff. The second, which I use
for comparison with the first, is an environmental analysis for a Middle
School library, which I created as part of a group. The third is a
report of a tour of an archival institution, which included in depth
discussion of its challenges.

### First and Second Pieces of Evidence: Public Library Site Visit, LIBR 232, and Middle School Library Environmental Analysis, LIBR 204

<aside>

[Library Visit - Reference Desk]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr232/visit-reference/)

[Strategic Plan for a Middle School, Part 1]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr204/strategic-plan_part-1/)

</aside>

<aside>

**Note** - References to the Middle School have been censored to protect
the privacy of the group member involved.

</aside>

In the Spring of 2013, as part of a class exploring the issues faced by
public libraries, I conducted a semi-formal visit of the Roseville
Public Library in Roseville, MN. As a part of that visit, I also
interviewed the library branch manager and one of the reference
librarians on staff. They were able to give me great insight into the
specific problems they face in a public library. In an earlier class,
Information Management from the Fall of 2011, a group I was a part of
conducted a similarly detailed analysis of a small Middle School library
in E------, CA. One of the other group members was the
managing---actually, the only---librarian for the media center, and she
was able to offer similar insight into the workings of the library as
the branch manager at the Roseville Library. As part of the group, I
created part of the literature review dealing with Mission, Vision, and
Values statements in school libraries, I helped to develop the proposed
Mission and Vision statements for the library, and performed the part of
the Environmental Analysis tracking economic, political, and cultural
trends, and played an equal part in the writing of the SWOT analysis.

The Roseville Library is the largest branch of the Ramsey County Public
Library system, which encompasses northern St. Paul and the surrounding
suburbs. The Roseville library is a modern facility with a large staff
of both full time and part time librarians, as well as dozens of
volunteers. This branch acts as a central hub for the other branches
within the system, and serves over 200,000 patrons altogether. However,
the library system is underfunded, with a smaller budget per capita than
any of the other six library systems in the metropolitan area, and often
faces competition from the nearby (and better funded) St. Paul Public
Library and Minneapolis Public Library. Many of the librarians on staff
must fill multiple roles throughout the library, including the branch
manager who is assigned to the reference desk once a week. The biggest
challenge the library faces, then, is how to best allocate scarce
resources among many different departments.

The P------ Middle School Library Media Center is significantly smaller,
though just as busy thanks to even scarcer resources. Due to
renovations, the media center is actually currently housed in two large
storage containers, with space very much at a premium. The library
currently only has one person on staff, a single librarian who, at the
time of analysis, had not yet received her MLIS degree. Additional needs
are met, when possible, by student volunteers, though most of the time
the librarian is on her own. The P------ Middle School, and thus its
library, serves young adolescents from several nearby towns, most of
whom are bussed in from their homes, while many residents of the town in
which the school is located end up attending other, private schools. The
budget for the school and the library is very tight, with most of what
little is available earmarked for the new building into which the
library will soon be moving. Nonetheless, the library is busy, with
nearly twenty percent of the school population using the library on a
daily basis. According to the librarian, the largest challenge she faces
is simply finding the time to complete any of the many tasks for which
she is responsible, while also giving service to her students.

On the surface, both of these libraries appear similar in purpose and
action, once the differences in size and location are taken into
account. Both serve as major centers of activity for their communities,
both are primarily concerned with direct service to their patrons, and
both face great challenges due to their small budgets. The priorities
for a public library described by Pacios (2007) are certainly true of
the Roseville library,a nd are largely true of the P------ Middle School
Library. They are dedicated to the lifelong learning of their patrons, a
priority that is even more significant for a school library, and they
both do what they can within their budgets to build a thorough
collection that serves the diverse need of their patrons.

The biggest differences, then, are the environments in which the
libraries work, and the limits within which they have to function. Most
obvious is their clientele, with public libraries like Roseville serving
all ages and school libraries like P------ only serving the age groups
that attend the connected school. Less obvious, though if anything more
important, is the source and origin of their clientele. Public libraries
generally serve their own neighborhoods, and can tailor their service to
the demographics of those neighborhoods. The P------ Middle School,
however, does not clearly serve the neighborhood in which it sits, since
local economics have led to poorer student from out of town attending
the school while the wealthier locals go elsewhere. Finally, there is a
great deal of difference in the organization that oversees the library,
and the groups who affect what they can or cannot do. The Roseville
Library is subject only to the Ramsey County Library system, and to a
lesser extent Ramsey County itself. The school library, however, must
bow to the demands of the school district, the county, the city, and any
number of parents and watchdog groups who wish to have a say in what the
library is allowed.

One thing unique about the school library, that would be incredibly
difficult to duplicate in a public library, is the sense of community
*within* the library and amongst its patrons. The library is used by the
student body, who see one another every day and interact often both in
and outside of school. Because of this, the students feel like they
belong in the library, and that the library belongs to them, in a way
much stronger than for the patrons of a public library. The Roseville
library, on the other hand, benefits from a much greater support network
both among other libraries, and among the community. The school library
always seems in danger of being closed or abandoned as parents try to
send their children elsewhere. The Roseville library is seen as a vital
part of the overall community, one that could never be removed, even
despite its budget troubles. The advocates for the P------ Middle School
Library are passionate, but few and with little support, and the sense
of community comes from the students rather than from the organization.

These two projects have helped me see the contrasts between
organizations that, from the outside, appear very similar. School
libraries have much more oversight, and much stronger opinions involved
about what is appropriate to carry and what is not. They are also
dedicated, by design and purpose, almost purely to support instruction
and learning for their patrons, though many librarians have fought to
allow more entertaining materials in for the children they serve. Public
libraries, on the other hand, benefit from the much wider audience and
much freer environment in which to run their organization. Censorship is
always fought against in public libraries, but often tolerated or
expected in school libraries. As I continue in my own career, no matter
what kind of organization I find myself, I will have to keep in mind the
environment in which it operates as the main factor for what will be
allowed and expected of me.

### Third Piece of Evidence: Archive Tour, LIBR 256

<aside>

[Tour of the Charles Babbage Institute]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr256/archivetour/)

</aside>

During the Summer of 2013 I took an introductory course to Archives and
Manuscript collections, an area for which I have long held an interest.
For one assignment, I visited an archival collection, the Charles
Babbage Institute, and was given a tour of the facilities by the
institute's archivist. I was able to see for myself the measures needed
for storage and preservation of the archives, which are buried several
stories underground in a sandstone cavern. During the tour, though, I
was also given an introduction to the organization and institution of
the archives, as the archivist described his work and the challenges he
faces as an archivist. I discovered that, though the archives and
several others are technically part of a university collection, they are
very different from the rest of the university library in terms of
actions, responsibilities, and relation to other organizations within
the library system.

My experience with university libraries goes back to my time as an
undergraduate, during which I worked as a cataloging and system
maintenance clerk at Washington State University's Holland Library. In
that time I was able to see the library organization and hierarchy up
close, though as a lowly work-study employee I was not directly affected
by this organization very much. The many different parts of that library
were often surprisingly separated, though with every department subject
to the requests and demands of the school faculty. The university was
large enough to support several different subject libraries spread
throughout the campus, each with its own staff of librarians and
work-study students, though Rubin (2010) describes how academic
libraries in general have fewer accredited staff with higher numbers of
employees without MLIS degrees.. From what I have seen, the University
of Minnesota Library is equally large and diverse as WSU, and the U of M
includes in one building their archives and special collections,
including the Charles Babbage Institute.

The Charles Babbage Institute is one of a dozen archives and special
collections held in the University of Minnesota's Anderson Library
building. This building includes several offices, an exhibition hall
with rotating displays from the archives, and a monitored reading room
that patrons use when they access anything from the collections. This
building sits above the main archival storage, which is shared by all of
the archival collections in two large caverns that have been excavated
from the sandstone beneath the soil and the foundations of the library.
The CBI has only a single permanent staff member for its archives, the
archivist himself, as well as one part-time student assistant and the
occasional intern. Much of the technical work processing the archival
materials is performed by a central service staff that works with all of
the archival collections, though they do not directly report to any one
of them. Just as often, though, the archivist must perform the work
himself.

As a part of the university library system, the CBI obviously shares
many similarities and characteristics with the other departments. Like
the heads of the other library departments, the archivist works largely
independently, with little crossover with other staff of equal rank. The
archivist also works closely with school faculty, not only to promote
his archives to students and increase usage, but also to support the
curriculum of the school with materials out of the archival collection.
Like any other department in the university library, as well, the
archives is always understaffed and backlogged with materials to be
processed. The archives, like many other parts of a large university
library, is devoted almost entirely to detailed and original research,
and pays less attention to simple reference questions, though the
archivist does perform reference and research for students and other
researchers who use the resources of the CBI.

These strong similarities make the differences stand out all the more.
Though technically part of the university libraries, the CBI is also
separate from it, and the archivist himself is not properly part of the
university library hierarchy. The archivist answers to a director and
chairman of the Charles Babbage Institute, and they oversee the
direction of the archive's collection development, as well as the
professional performance of the archivist himself. As well, because of
the small size of the archival staff, the archivist ends up performing
many tasks that in another department would be delegated to a
subordinate librarian or clerk. For example, any reference work or
search of the archives for certain items requested by users will almost
always need to be found, pulled, and delivered by the archivist. On the
other hand, some of the support functions are shared among a common
staff to a much greater extent than in any of the other library
departments, in which lower level staff usually performs support work
only for their direct supervisors and managers, not for entire
buildings.

This experience has shown me the deepest part of the archives, both
literally and figuratively. This archival institution is both a part of
the university libraries, and apart from them, both subject to the
library hierarchy and separate from it. The archivist here finds himself
pulled in at least two directions, trying to fulfill the needs of the
university and the needs of the archival institution itself, and at
times these priorities do conflict. This has shown me that the
organizational settings in which information professionals work can be
surprisingly complicated, with multiple responsibilities and conflicting
loyalties. I may find myself in such a situation in the future, and I
can only do my best to keep to the core purpose of all information
organizations---to connect users to information---and try to weather
whatever other storm presents itself.

Future Application
------------------

This survey has only scratched the surface of the information
organizations that exist in modern LIS work. Indeed, it has left
untouched the field of private firms and for-profit information brokers.
However, I believe I have shown that I do understand the different kinds
of organizations in which information professionals work, as a concept,
and that the skills, loyalties, and expectations will be quite different
depending on the needs of those organizations and the environments in
which they exist. I know that I, at least, would much rather work for
some organizations than others, and would prefer certain work
environments over others, but not everyone can be choosy about their
employer in this fluctuating economy, so some flexibility is necessary.
The important thing, then, is to be able to adapt my skills and my
attitude to the different kinds of organizations in which I may find
myself.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Pacios, A. R. (2007). The priorities of public libraries at the onset of
the third millennium. *Library Management*, *28*(6/7), 416–427.
doi:[10.1108/01435120710774549](http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120710774549)

Rubin, R. E. (2010). *Foundations of library and information science*
(3rd ed.). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman Publishers.

</div>
