---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
competency: |
    Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
    is able to apply the fundamental principles of planning, management,
    marketing, and advocacy.
csl: 'apa.csl'
title: Competency D
...

Meaning and Articulation of Competency
--------------------------------------

No library exists in a vacuum, nor does any librarian who works within
it. Every library or information organization exists as one part of a
larger environment, and every librarian or information professional is
but one member of a larger team. In order to fulfill the purposes of an
information organization, each team has its leaders who direct the other
members, and build relationships both within the team and beyond it.
These leaders---in LIS organizations, usually those team members who
hold the MLIS degree---have several functions they must be able to
fulfill. Internally, they must be able to plan ahead, to look ahead and
anticipate the organization's needs, and how best to meet those needs,
and they must also be able to direct other team members under their
command to work together and execute those plans. Externally, they must
be able to communicate with those outside the organization, and inform
them not only what their organization does, but how this is beneficial
and should be supported. In both types of roles, the leaders are most
responsible for growing their organization beyond what it currently is.

Preparation and Evidence
------------------------

I am fortunate in that I come to my LIS career with a great deal of
experience in this competency already. Within the retail organization
where I work, I have spent nearly my entire career as a member of
leadership, with increasing responsibility throughout that time. I began
as an advocate for several department specialists, acting as a liaison
between them and both customers and management so that the department
could put its best face forward without sacrificing their expert
talents. I later became direct supervisor of larger and larger teams,
and have had the chance over the years to refine my personal management
techniques for directing my team members, building the relationships
between them, and successfully executing plans as directed by my own
managers.

I have brought this experience with me to my LIS career, and while many
of the details are different because of the very different focus and
goals of the two fields, the basic principles underlying the management
of people remain the same. I have been able to learn more theoretical
background within my courses, as my experience was largely hands-on and
forged through trial and error, and the advice of my own managers. I
have also gotten a much stronger introduction to marketing and advocacy,
which were not usually part of my purview before, though not completely
alien to me either. With this informing my background, I have chosen
three pieces of evidence to show my mastery of this competency. The
first is my own philosophy of management, in which I describe my own
views on what is important in management. The second is a speech I
composed ofr outreach toward people not familiar with Archival work, in
order to advocate for the field. The third is a strategic plan I
developed as part of a group to improve the service of a middle school
library.

### First Piece of Evidence: Philosophy of Management, LIBR 204

<aside>

[Philosophy of Management]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr204/philosophy-of-management/)

</aside>

One of the first courses in which I participated, in the Fall of 2011,
was the core course on Information Organizations and Management. This
was a survey of the many challenges facing information professionals,
and the need for us to provide leadership within the organizations we
eventually join. This culminated in a statement of Management
Philosophy, in my case a summary of the various aspect of information
management, and an articulation of what I thought was most important for
a leader to master. I drew upon my experiences as a supervisor, as well
as the earlier coursework and readings of the class, and in particular I
took inspiration from the words of Collins (2005). I decided, and
argued, that the most important skill for a manager to possess is the
ability to build and develop a successful team.

The first part of this skill, chronologically at least, is the ability
to find and hire the right people. Even in ideal circumstances this can
be difficult; I have had to comb through job applications and conduct
job interviews before, and it can sometimes be impossible to predict who
will be the strongest team members based on this very short
introduction. As I describe in the paper, this can be even more
complicated for libraries because of the nature of their workforce. In
most jobs, there are limited funds to pay for salaries and wages, giving
a firm incentive to find the right people and a simple reason to avoid
weaker employees, but information organizations often have a large
volunteer workforce, making it more difficult to choose *not* to hire
someone who is not the strongest candidate. There are techniques
available to help recognize stronger potential employees, but even then
it is often a crap shoot.

Because it is then impossible to hire the perfect team, and indeed
changing needs may make a perfect team imperfect later, it is even more
important to be able to develop an existing team into the right one.
This is partly fulfilled by teaching and instruction, but even more so
is accomplished through understanding the individuals within a team, and
what best motivates them. I have struggled to learn this for each of the
people I lead in my own work, and it is a never ending challenge, but
the results are worth the challenge. Every person is different, with
different skills, different assumptions about how things do or should
work, and different motivations that will lead them to do the best job
they can.

Right this moment I can name employees I supervise who love to interact
with customers and hate to deal with quiet downtimes, and others who
want nothing more than to sit in the office and do their tasks without
being interrupted or disturbed. Both have a place, but as a leader I
have to understand this about them, and build upon their strengths in
order to make the team as a whole more effective. Again, in an
information organization this can be even more important with a large
number of volunteers, as you lose the motivation of a paycheck that for
many people is enough to inspire at least minimum competence. Though, of
course, I would not be satisfied with minimum competence, and I often
work with lower performing team members to both teach them the skills,
and learn how to motivate them so they have the will to reach greater
heights.

Both the skills I have picked up in practice, and the theory I have
learned while developing this philosophy of management will serve me
well as I continue my career in LIS. Though leading people in a project
still does not always come naturally to me, I have learned several
techniques for not only recognizing and correcting under performance in
others, but also in myself as I try to motivate and lead others in our
work. I still believe that developing a team is the most important skill
for a manager to learn, as nearly every skill can be learned and
mastered by that team as a whole. A librarian never should stand alone,
and as I build, motivate, and manage great teams throughout my coming
career, I will never have to stand alone.

### Second Piece of Evidence: Archives Outreach Speech, LIBR 256

<aside>

[Archive Outreach Speech]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr256/outreachspeech/)

</aside>

The principles management apply to all areas and all organizations that
are involved in the information profession, as I learned during the
Summer of 2013 during my course on Archives and archival institutions.
One of those principles that is most vital for all organizations is that
of marketing and outreach. Information organizations are pointless if
they are not used, and they will not be used if potential clients do not
know about them, or do not know what they offer. This is true for giant
university collections that cater to researchers, and for small school
libraries that exist for the use of elementary students, as well as
everything in between. I was able to put this marketing need into
practice during the Archives class with a project in which I wrote a
speech that I would give to a room full of potential donors or clients,
explaining to them the benefits of an archival institution.

One important part of marketing is simply informing people about the
organization, program, or product under discussion. It is any number of
actions that let people know you are there. As Pearson (2009) describes,
connecting and informing users about current programs and services is
vital for keeping and gaining their support, whether in usage or in
funds. This might mean a press release, it might mean advertising, it
might mean physically going to a school or a club where your potential
clients are, and telling them what the you have to offer. I have done
some marketing myself in support of a local teen learning program, and I
saw firsthand that often the biggest hurdle is to simply get the message
out there to the people who might be interested. In the case of this
project, informing means going to a gathering of potential users, and
explaining to them as clearly as I can what an archives is, what it
does, and why.

Beyond just informing, though, marketing is very much a skill of
*selling*. It is selling people on what the organization has to offer,
why that is a good thing, and most importantly, why *they* should care.
Marketing, then, means making a personal connection with potential
clients, and showing them how *they* can benefit from the program or
service being offered. This is easy to see in a retail setting, where
there are clear and definite products being sold, but it is just as
important for an information organization, where the benefits may be
much less tangible. Often, appealing to a personal sense of worth and
value is all that is available to us, making it all the more important
to be able to sell that benefit to people. In the case of this speech, I
sought to make that personal connection with the group, and to show the
benefits from their point of view. This speech is aimed at a
hypothetical room full of members of the Rotary Club, and I tailored the
speech to this audience by describing the benefits of an archives in
words used by one of their organizations past presidents, and by
connecting the purpose and direction of archives to the goals and values
of Rotary International. In this way, I am not just informing them of
what an archives does, I am giving them a reason to care that it does
that, to motivate them into supporting the archives themselves.

Marketing is a difficult skill, one that depends a great deal on the
environment and the organization or program being marketed, but it is
one that is necessary for the success of any information organization.
In times of tight budgets and limited resources, it is vital that the
services being offered get used, lest they be discontinued. No service
is guaranteed success, and so when I manage a service or program I will
do what I can to inform the people who would most benefit from the
service that it is available, in order to give it the best chance for
success. This will mean knowing how to reach the audience I need, and
how to connect with that audience once I have reached them, showing them
the usefulness of the service for them specifically, not just in the
abstract. Marketing is about making connections, and I will continue to
do what I can to build those connections to the right people.

### Third Piece of Evidence: Middle School Library Strategic Plan, LIBR 204

<aside>

[Strategic Plan for a Middle School, Part 2]({{ site.baseurl }}/evidence/libr204/strategic-plan_part-2/)

</aside>

<aside>

**Note** - References to the Middle School have been censored to protect
the privacy of the group member involved with the project.

</aside>

For any management task, or really any task that is more complicated
than a single step, the ability to both develop and execute a plan of
action is of great importance to ensuring success. I have learned this
the hard way over several years of reacting to demands from upper
management, and attempting to build successful retail departments in a
lagging economy. I was able to continue this practice during the same
Information Management class from the Fall of 2011. As the largest
project of the semester, a group of fellow students and myself developed
a strategic plan for the improvement of a middle school library in
southern California. For my part, I helped to develop the objectives and
action plan for two of the four goals that the group had decided upon,
and I brought my hands-on experience with planning and meeting goals to
this project.

Any plan must begin with an understanding of the environment, of the
strengths and weaknesses that currently exist. From that understanding,
it is then important to develop a goal, with a specific outcome that the
plan is meant to accomplish. In a professional setting this goal must be
specific, defined by the environment, and measurable, so that success or
failure can be determined without question. The group with which I
worked performed an environmental scan and SWOT analysis of the P------
Middle School Library in an earlier project, and the results of this
project were used to develop the goals and hoped-for outcomes of this
strategic plan. We followed the guidelines for project planning
described in chapter 8 of Evans & Ward (2007), and with the analysis and
overall agreed-upon goals in place, we split apart the assignment to
each develop the specific objectives and action plans for our individual
sections.

Each goal was divided in several specific objectives, and each objective
had several parts. The first part is simply a statement of the
objective, which describes not only what the goal is, by *why* it is a
goal, what benefit it will have for the library and for the community.
The second part describes the specific actions that will be taken to
meet this objective, including what is expected of the participants, and
how these actions can be changed or updated if needed. The third part is
the assessment, describing exactly how success or failure will be
determined for the objective. Without this assessment criteria, success
would be completely subjective and impossible to determine.

These goals were created with the intention of not only improving the
school library, but also to improve its integration and usefulness
within the community. The intention, here, is to advocate for the
library in building its relationships with other institutions throughout
the community. Just in the goals that I directly helped to develop, this
includes developing classroom instruction for library use, building
research guides to support the local school curriculum, and engaging
local students to participate in library programs and develop others for
their peers. By improving the library's relevance and its connections to
other institutions, the library will then be seen as an indispensable
part of that community, and if the plan are successful, teachers and
students in the area will become advocates for the library as well,
increasing its presence in the neighborhood. The greatest advocates for
an institution are those that recommend it on their own, with nothing to
gain for themselves.

This project allowed me to practice my planning and assessment skills in
a far different environment that I have so far experiences, so I could
see for myself the differences in planning for an information
organization as compared to the planning for retail with which I am
already familiar. Even so, the similarities far outweigh the
differences. It remains important to have realistic and attainable goals
based on the needs and resources available, and to have specific
criteria for measuring success of the plan after it has been executed.
This project also allowed my to develop goals for the advocacy of
library, again in specific measurable ways and not in abstract, and
therefor useless, statements. As I continue onward in my career, both
parts of management will almost certainly become important parts of my
job, and the understanding I developed here will help me adapt to the
different needs and capabilities of an information organization.

Future Application
------------------

The experience I have as a retail supervisor was only a prelude to what
I will have to face going forward in my career. Those who have an MLIS
degree are, by default, the managers and supervisor of the information
world, with anywhere from two to two hundred people reporting to them,
depending on the type and size of organization in which they work. I
have supervised both large and small teams before, and I will continue
to show respect and understanding to the people who report to me, even
as I work to develop them into better and more effective professionals.
More than that, though, I will be able to use this experience to market
and advocate for my institution, building its usefulness and relevance
within the community by connecting it to the people who would make use
of it, but may not know that they can. As a librarian, manager, or
information specialist, my job will always involve trying to improve the
organization and the services it offers.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Collins, J. (2005). *Good to great and the social sectors*. New York,
NY: HarperCollins.

Evans, G. E., & Ward, P. L. (2007). *Management basics for information
professionals* (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman Publishers.

Pearson, P. (2009). Fundraising, collection and advocacy in tough times.
*Public Libraries*, *48*(4), 21–23.

</div>
