---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
competency: |
    Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
    is able to use service concepts, principles, and techniques to connect
    individuals or groups with accurate, relevant, and appropriate
    information.
csl: 'apa.csl'
title: Competency I
...

Meaning and Articulation of Competency
--------------------------------------

The very core and foundation of library science, as a whole, is arguably
to connect people with information. Every other aspect is, one way or
another, intended to support this most basic of principles. This
competency, then, is most concerned with the skills and attitude needed
specifically for connecting users with information, and for making sure
that the information found is right for the user. In particular, this
competency is concerned with the concept of *service*, as in we serve
our users by helping them to find the information they want or need. As
we do this, we will try to make sure the information is correct and
true, that it fits with what our users have asked for, and that it is
right for the particular situation and context in which the user is
searching.

There is nearly limitless information available to information science
professionals, and nearly limitless ways it can be found and presented.
In order to provide this information for our users, it is vital to keep
several concepts in mind. It is important to understand what information
is being sought, what question is being asked, so that the right
information is found and presented. As well, the question should be
answered fully, until the user has all the information they need,
without stopping once the initial question seems to be answered. The
information search should be tailored to each individual user, as each
user has different needs even with the same question. Finally, the
information is for our users, and should be provided without bias and
without trying to change the users beliefs or opinions about the topic
they are researching. In short, we are here to serve the user searching
for information, not to judge or horde that information.

Preparation and Evidence
------------------------

I have chosen two pieces of evidence to demonstrate my mastery of this
competency. The first is a series of exercises answering reference
interview questions. It shows the different challenges faced when
conducting a traditional reference interview. The second is an online
reference guide that I created. It demonstrates ways to connect users
with information even when there is no reference interview possible.

### First Piece of Evidence: Reference Exercises, LIBR 210

I began learning the ins and outs of reference services in the Beginning
Reference class in Spring of 2012. While this class included many
different resources that con be used to help clients find information,
the focus was more on how we as librarians would interact with those
clients. There was much discussion about qualifying and clarifying
questions with clients during a reference interview, overcoming
communication difficulties, and maintaining two-way communication even
after the question is answered so that clients are satisfied with the
information they have found. In support of these goals, several times
throughout the semester we had exercises, a short of questions we might
be asked at the reference desk. While it was important to answer the
question, equally as important was *how* we would interact with the
client in order to find the right answer.

For my approach while answering the reference questions, I decided to
write out the scenarios almost like a play or script, rather than simply
describing the resources I would use to find the needed information.
This way I could articulate the qualifying questions I would ask, as
well as demonstrate how I would continue to give and solicit feedback to
be sure that the answers I was finding were right for the client. I
specifically chose to make the initial answers found wrong, or too
limited, to reflect how complicated reference questions often are in
real life. To mix it up a bit, in one of the three exercises I also had
"bad" librarians, demonstrating the wrong way to interact with clients.
As well, to show how the library world is becoming more computerized, I
used one of the exercises to show techniques for answering reference
questions via chat or email.

The way I approached these questions, in particular my imagined
interactions with users, was greatly colored by my work experience. In
the last several years, as I have worked with customers in a retail
setting, I have learned that it takes more than simply answering the
question as asked to satisfy most customers. People are often vague,
they make assumptions about what they already know or what they need,
and often do not have the full context to even ask the correct question.
I have learned to take an active role, not only in the answer, but in
the question itself as well, by restating the question in my own words
to be sure I understand, by asking clarifying questions of my own, and
by following up on any answer I give to be sure it was right, or that it
was enough. At least as often as not, the initial answer is not right,
or is not enough, but it was a step in the right direction of finding
the answers that my customers really needed.

One technique for understanding the question, which I use in nearly all
of the responses in the exercises, is to ask the patron why they are
looking for the information they want. Whether it is for a class, for a
personal project, or simply for their own amusement, if I know the
motivation for the question I can better judge what sort of answer they
need. I took inspiration for this, as well as for the other techniques
shown in these exercises, from Ross, Nilsen, & Radford (2009), who give
step-by-step processes for working with patrons whoa re not always clear
in their questions. In the second question of Exercise \#3 and the
second question of Exercise \#4, the users were specifically doing
research for a class project, and in these I made sure to ask for
details on the class assignment, to be sure the answers I helped find
were within the right scope. On the other hand, the second question of
Exercise \#2 and the first question of Exercise \#3 were both for the
patrons' personal use, but the initial questions were so broad that they
needed to be narrowed down to something reasonable. Even with no
pre-written assignment, the question needs to be narrowed down and made
specific so that users are not overwhelmed with possibly irrelevant
resources.

It is important while searching for information or answers to give
constant feedback to the user, letting them know what you are doing and
why. This not only gives a sense of progress to the patron, it also
gives them a chance to catch you if you are heading down the wrong
trail. I the first and second questions of Exercise \#2, the"bad"
librarians went straight to *an* answer while giving little detail in
how they were searching, and giving no clue to their patrons whether
there were alternatives. The "good" librarian, on the other hand, kept
her patrons up to date, and was able to refine or change her search
based on what they told her. Even in the email-based question from
Exercise \#4, where the patron cannot help refine the search, I showed
how feedback on the process of the search can be given so that patrons
can either follow the same search pattern themselves, or resubmit a more
specific question if the search was wrong.

Even after the question seems to be answered, the interaction is not
complete. As <span>Oâ€™Gorman</span> & Trott (2009) have noted, it is
increasingly important to continuously follow up with users, to provide
service not possible by searching alone. In Exercise \#2 question two,
as well as Exercise \#3 question one, I showed how a librarian should
follow up with users to be sure the information found was right, and to
see if they needed anything more. There was no way to know ahead of time
that the patrons would need more information, but if they had been left
with just the answers given, they would still have not been satisfied
with the information they had. I do the same with the online
interactions, at the very least inviting users to resubmit their
questions if the answer given is not enough or not correct. Answering
the question as asked may only be the first step in connecting the user
with the information they need.

As a particular challenge that often comes up in reference services, the
exercises included examples of 'sensitive' questions that must be
handled delicately, and in my responses I demonstrated some techniques
for approaching these questions. Sensitive questions can include
anything that a user may find embarrassing or personal, many questions
that require specialized knowledge, and anything about which people hold
very strong and often opposing opinions. Examples include anything
relating to sex, the law, politics, or health matters. Patrons may be
uncomfortable asking these questions, and we as information specialists
may be uncomfortable trying to answer them. Ross et al. (2009) advocate
a positive attitude, reinforcing with our patrons how we *can* help them
without overstepping our bounds. With that in mind, I attempted to show
some right (and wrong) ways to go about answering questions of this sort
in the exercises.

The most important guideline is to approach sensitive questions with
discretion. Unlike the "bad" librarians in Exercise \#2 question three,
it is best to keep your voice low and keep the conversation private and
confidential as much as possible. It is also important to let patrons
come to their own conclusions, or to guide them toward experts, without
trying to definitively answer questions ourselves if we are not
authorities. This is especially important with anything relating to
medical or legal questions, as users (and, as a result, librarians) can
get into serious trouble if they are given advice that is not true. The
"good" librarian in Exercise \#2 question three makes certain to give a
variety of sources for her answers, does not give any advice on what the
patron should do with regards to the law, and is adamant that the patron
should speak to a lawyer if he needs any actual advice regarding the
law. Finally, we should avoid "preaching" our own opinion and should let
patrons decide for themselves, only pointing out the information without
judging it. This is shown in Exercise \#3 question one, where the
librarian offers a variety of different commentaries for the Bible
without endorsing any of them, and is careful to keep his own beliefs
out of the answer entirely.

These exercises have helped me to think critically about my own approach
to customers and users, and to be more self-aware of how I am speaking
to them and how I am listening to them. I had already learned active
listening from my experience in retail, but I now better understand how
and why it works, and how to keep actively listening even while
answering questions. The specific resources used to find information are
constantly changing, and are often very specific to the type of
question, but the service techniques and the reasons behind them remain
the same. I am better at restating and qualifying questions so that both
I and the user know I understand what is being asked. I have learned
that questions are not always complete once they have been answered, and
now make it a habit to go back to the customer afterward to be sure they
have everything they need. I have a better grasp of how to recognize my
own prejudices, and to keep them out of any answer I give. I will always
be learning new resources, and new tools for finding answers, but I am
confident that I know how to interact with users in order to be sure
they have to best and most appropriate information to which I have
access.

### Second Piece of Evidence: LibGuide Project, LIBR 228

In an ideal world, each user of library services would be able to work
one-on-one with a librarian to find the information or resources they
need. Of course, this is often not the case. For a number of different
reasons, many people want or need to find information without the direct
assistance of a library worker. However, that does not mean they need to
work entirely alone. Library workers can anticipate these needs, and
develop resources to help find the right information even when they
cannot work with their users personally. This is the concept behind this
assignment,

In the fall semester of 2012 I participated in a course on Advanced
Reference Services, and this class was very concerned with the need to
connect users to information even when it was not possible to interact
with them directly. A major project of the course was the creation of an
online Research Guide or LibGuide, a set of webpages designed to work as
a "one-stop shop" of resources for users researching a particular topic.
I chose to create my Research Guide on William Shakespeare because of my
background in English Literature, so that I could concentrate on the
needs of users without needing to heavily research the topic itself. I
consciously tried to make the guide user-oriented, focusing on the
resources that are most useful and on techniques that present these
resources in the most accessible fashion. I used the research of Hintz
et al. (2010) as a guideline for building the Research Guide.

When creating a research guide, one of the most important aspects
actually has little to do with the resources or topic at all. The layout
and design of the guide must be carefully crafted so that it is inviting
to users, otherwise even the most finely researched collection of
resources will go unseen. Hintz et al. (2010) discovered that most users
prefer a simple layout, but with small pages and few tabs. Users do not
want to get confused or overwhelmed by dozens of resources in a large
and complex tree. I created the separate pages of the guide based on
simple and easy to understand divisions, and kept each page small with a
very focused list of resources. I also attempted to mix the type of
resources on each page, so that users would not be confused with a wall
of text. I kept everything as clean and as clear as possible within the
limits of the LibGuide creation software.

For the actual resources selected, I kept to a focus on an intended
audience of undergraduate students. It is all but impossible to create a
research guide that is appropriate for all potential users, so a
specific audience to aim for is vital to keep the size and scope of the
guide manageable. That being said, the intended audience is almost
certainly not going to be the only audience, so other users should be
accommodated as much as feasible even if they are catered for directly.
For an audience of undergraduates, I chose scholarly editions of
Shakespeare's plays rather than simple reader's editions, as well as
broad and high-level commentaries and analyses instead of the in-depth
study that P.H.D. students would need. With all of the resources,
though, I kept the descriptions simple and clear and avoided jargon so
that the guide would still be useful to non-students who simply have an
interest in the plays.

Those descriptions are the main way in which the Research Guide is made
a useful service for users, and more than simply a list of resources.
Though the medium is very different from a reference interview, the same
concepts and intentions must be kept in mind when a research guide is
created. I chose a variety of resources to anticipate a large number of
possible questions, since I would not be able to qualify the questions
individually. I described how each resource is useful for research, so
that users can judge whether any given item is the right information for
their needs. Though it is not possible in this one project, in a real
research guide I would also have contact information and an Ask the
Librarian link, so that users could give feedback and ask more detailed
questions that are not answered by the guide, in order to allow for
follow through that is not possible in a static web page. All of the
same beats need to be addressed, as much as possible given the very
different circumstances.

I created a Research Guide that, as much as is possible, acts to connect
users with information on the single subject it covers. Though no
reference interview is possible, it still follows all of the same
intentions and guidelines for pointing users to the information they
need. It was a challenge, but the project did help me think much more
about how to connect people with resources when I cannot interact with
them, and how to anticipate what the most likely questions and
information needs would be. With more and more people doing their
research online and from home, and with budgets and staffing being cut
in many institutions, it is vital to be able to help users find what
they need indirectly. With this Research Guide, I have created a way for
people to find more relevant and topical information on Shakespeare and
his plays than a blind search would allow, and I have learned the
techniques necessary to do so again.

Future Application
------------------

I fully expect connecting users to information to be the primary focus
of my career, directly or indirectly, and these projects have helped to
better prepare me for that future. With the reference exercises, I have
been able to connect theory and planning with the experience I already
had with customers. Going forward, I will apply these skills when
helping users in order to best understand their information needs, and
make sure the resources I help them find are the most relevant and
appropriate for them. I will continue to develop the skills needed for
active listening, as well as learning the specific resources available
to me, but I can put those skills and resources together so that my
patrons do not have to leave dissatisfied or empty handed. The Research
Guide project has also given me much needed practice for connecting
users with information even when I cannot interact with them. I am sure
I will end up creating or editing many more Research Guides in the
future, and I now have a foundation for how to design such guides so
that users are comfortable using them to find information on their own.
Between both these projects and several other experiences, I feel fully
prepared to help clients and customers find the information they want.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Hintz, K., Farrar, P., Eshghi, S., Sobol, B., Naslund, J.-A., Lee, T.,
Stephens, T., et al. (2010). Letting students take the lead: A
user-centered approach to evaluating subject guides. *Evidence Based
Library and Information Practice*, *5*(4), 39â€“52.

<span>Oâ€™Gorman</span>, J., & Trott, B. (2009). What will become of
reference in academic and public libraries? *Journal of Library
Administration*, *49*, 327â€“339.
doi:[10.1080/01930820902832421](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930820902832421)

Ross, C. S., Nilsen, K., & Radford, M. L. (2009). *Conducting the
reference interview* (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman Publishers.

</div>
