---
title: Main Parts of the e-Portfolio
...

## [Introduction]({{ site.baseurl }}/introduction/)

## [Competency A]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-a/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to articulate the ethics, values, and foundational principles of
library and information professionals and their role in the promotion of
intellectual freedom.

</blockquote>


## [Competency B]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-b/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to describe and compare the organizational settings in which
library and information professionals practice.

</blockquote>

## [Competency C]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-c/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to recognize and describe cultural and economic diversity in the
clientele of libraries or information organizations.

</blockquote>

## [Competency D]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-d/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to apply the fundamental principles of planning, management,
marketing, and advocacy.

</blockquote>

## [Competency E]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-e/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to design, query and evaluate information retrieval systems.

</blockquote>

## [Competency F]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-f/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to use the basic concepts and principles related to the
selection, evaluation, organization, and preservation of physical and
    digital items and collections.

</blockquote>

## [Competency G]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-g/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to demonstrate understanding of basic principles and standards
involved in organizing information, including classification,
cataloging, metadata, or other systems.

</blockquote>

## [Competency H]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-h/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to demonstrate proficiency in identifying, using, and evaluating
current and emerging information and communication technologies.

</blockquote>

## [Competency I]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-i/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to use service concepts, principles, and techniques to connect
individuals or groups with accurate, relevant, and appropriate
information.

</blockquote>

## [Competency J]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-j/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to describe the fundamental concepts of information-seeking
behaviors.

</blockquote>

## [Competency K]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-k/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to design instructional programs based on learning principles
and theories.

</blockquote>

## [Competency L]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-l/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to demonstrate understanding of quantitative and qualitative
research methods and of the evaluation and synthesis of research
literature.

</blockquote>

## [Competency M]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-m/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to demonstrate oral and written communication skills necessary
for professional collaboration and presentations.

</blockquote>

## [Competency N]({{ site.baseurl }}/competency-n/)

<blockquote class="competency">

Each graduate of the Master of Library and Information Science program
is able to evaluate programs and services based on measurable criteria.

</blockquote>

## [Statement of Professional Philosophy]({{ site.baseurl }}/philosophy/)

## [Conclusion Part 1: Reflection]({{ site.baseurl }}/conclusion1_reflection/)

## [Conclusion Part 2: Professional Strengths]({{ site.baseurl }}/conclusion2_strengths/)

## [Affirmation of Integrity]({{ site.baseurl }}/affirmation/)
