---
title: Helping Patrons with Developmental Disabilities
class: LIBR 200
instructor: Robert Boyd
date: Fall 2011
abstract:|
    An ever growing number of people are being diagnosed with developmental
    disabilities, and libraries need to keep up. This paper includes a
    review of the relevant literature related to offering services for
    people with developmental disabilities. This area remains woefully
    underresearched. We then goes on to present some specific strategies
    that may be employed when developing programs for people with
    disabilities. Sections on mental Retardation, Attention Deficit
    Hyperactivity Disorder, and Autism Spectrum Disorders are discussed at
    length. Above all these strategies, though, the most important way to
    provide service is to encourage an attitude among staff that people with
    developmental disabilities are worthy of service, and a willingness to
    do what is needed to give that service.
...

Every day more and more people are being diagnosed with developmental
disabilities. These are disabilities that affect every aspect of a
person's life, without necessarily being obvious or even visible to
others. They affect behaviour, social development, and a person's
ability to live independantly. Libraries of all sorts are being called
upon to better serve persons with developmental disabilities. In order
to meet this demand, libraries must understand the disorders and the
people who live with them. Each disorder, and each person who has such a
disorder, presents unique challenges and requirements that libraries
must meet. More importantly, though, is that each person who has a
developmental disability is still a person, and deserves the same
respect and attention as any other patron.

## Literature Review

The issue of serving people with developmental disabilities remains
poorly researched within the library and information science field.
Though the number of articles and studies continues to grow, the
handbook edited by Walling and Irwin (1995) remains one of the only full
texts on the subject. The editors along with the contributing authors
cover a wide range of topics, from general information about the
disabilities it covers to specific suggestions for services and programs
to offer. The book is, however, a bit out of date, and does not reflect
the most current needs of libraries. For example, Asperger's syndrome is
not mentioned once in the entire book, and Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder is mentioned only briefly, as the book was
compiled before these disorders became so widely diagnosed. The book
remains, nonetheless, the best single resource on the topic.

Any attempt to provide service for people with developmental
disabilities must take into account the laws that have been passed that
both mandate and regulte such service. Irwin (1995) provides an overview
of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and how it can
affect libraries. While the act primarily targets schools, libraries are
a significant source of learning and must accommodate persons with
disabilities. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999) go into more
detail about IDEA, as well as the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
and the National Education Goals: America 2000 Act. They describe what
these laws require of educators and libraries, down to the specific
reasonable accommodations that a library must provide.

Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999) go beyond the law and delve
into the moral and societal benefits that come from providing service
for people with developmental disabilities. They describe how people
with disabilities can become better motivated and gain greater life
skills, and can enjoy increased opportunities in their education,
careers, and in their social lives. People without disabilities, on the
other hand, can benefit by gaining a better understanding of the
disabilities and becoming more accepting of the diversity of ability
around them. Walling (1995) also advocates offering services for their
own sake, recognizing "children and adults with disabilities as people
of ability who are worthy of support and encouragement" (p. xv).
Libraries should offer services for people with developmental
disabilities because it is right, not because it is required.

Mulliken and Atkins (2009) shoe some of the benefits that can come with
this open attitude. They describe the experiences of educators,
librarians, and students with developmental disabilities when an
academic library actively participated and seeks to include people wit
disabilities into the school's orientation. They reveal how timid many
students with disabilities began, often afraid they would be shunned by
the other students. However, These students and many others greatly
benefited from the close access to several librarians, as well as
instructors who could help "break the ice" and get the students to
socialize when one another, or to answer the orientation questions, or
mentor them as they began their academic careers.

There have been several more formal studies attempting to measure how
well libraries currently serve people with developmental disabilities.
Akin and Ross (2002) conducted a survey to determine how well Texas
public libraries serve children with learning disabilities. They
concluded that the libraries they surveyed do not serve children with
learning disabilities adequately, and that a great deal more research
and training is needed to help serve this population. Holmes (2008)
targeted her survey directly toward people with developmental
disabilities themselves, to assess their information needs and how well
they are being met with libraries. She found that a large percentage of
people with developmental disabilities did use the library, but they
overwhelmingly went only for books, and many were unaware of the other
services offered. She suggested better outreach and tutoring so that
this population would know about the options available to them at the
library. Brind'Amour (2010) developed her survey toward school libraries
specifically. She found that there is very little training among school
librarians to help them serve students with developmental disabilities.
Beyond that, though many teacher librarians felt they were meeting the
needs of their students, special education teachers disagreed, and that
a large number of students with developmental disabilities did not use
the library. She found a great need for additional training and, again,
outreach so that people with disabilities are aware of the resource
available to them.

Walling (2004) also conducted a survey, this one of library and
information science college programs, to see how many taught coursework
and prepared their students for working with people with developmental
disabilities. Similar to the above findings, Walling found that few
librarians were entering the workforce with a solid grasp of the needs
and issues surrounding the topic. While most library schools offered
information and instruction relating to the ADA, very few required that
their students should take such a course. Indeed, at many of the schools
the information on the ADA itself was limited to books and building
codes, but little specific coursework or advice for how best to help
people who live with developmental disabilities every day.

Fitzgibbons (1995) offers some insight for how school media centers can
provide service for their students with developmental disabilities. In
particular, the media center can help introduce students to information
and to information networks, can serve as an advocate and help change
attitudes about developmental disabilities, and can support and teach
literacy and learning skills. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999)
also address methods of training staff, developing collections, and
introducing new services for people with developmental disabilities.
They advocate developing collections that meet the specific needs of
children with special needs, including non-traditional materials such as
toys and games, as well as the creation of resource centers for parents
and professionals. Weingand (1990), as well, offers strategies for
programs and collections to help serve the "invisible" patrons. She
specifically focusses on evaluating the needs to the patron, regardless
of their level of ability, and in particular to get to know and
understand them in order to better serve them each day.

However, it is not enough to simply create programs for people with
disabilities. For success, people with disabilities must feel that they
are part of the group, a part of the community, in order to feel welcome
inside the library's walls. Barker (2011) shines the spotlight on these
social needs that are just as important to a library as the patrons'
information needs. She focusses on the need for greater training and
education among librarians, but also gives several practical strategies
and possible program implementations for helping people with
intellectual disabilities. She also emphasised that improving help and
access for people with disabilities also improves the library for all
other patrons, as well, and the training for addressing the special
needs of patrons with disabilities makes it that much easier to help all
patrons, even those who have never asked for help. Of particular
importance was the need to "see the individual, not the disability" (p.
13). By recognizing people with developmental disabilities as people
first, as individuals instead of a collection of symptoms, librarians
will be much better able to help them find what they need, and will be
far better prepared to help all of their patrons.

## Specific Stratigies

Each developmental disorder brings with it unique challenges and needs
for the people who must live their lives with them. While some
strategies can be applied to help people with several different
disabilities, or indeed to help any patron, there are also particular
strategies that can be employed to best help patrons with a specific
disorder. What follows is a selection of the more common developmental
disabilities, the particular challenges they present, and some specific
methods for helping people who have them. The first section will
concentrate on people with mental retardation, sometimes also referred
to as intellectual disability. The next section will focus on Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and the difficulties people with this
disorder face. Last will be Autism Spectrum Disorders and Asperger's
Syndrome, one of the more current hot button topics, though of course
people have lived with these disorder for centuries before it was
recognized. Throughout all sections, there will be attention paid to
programs that have already been created, as well as attitudes and
prejudices that may exist.

## Mental Retardation

Mental retardation is a disability characterized by significantly below
average intellectual ability, combined with limitations in
communication, health and safety, social skills, self-care, or several
other life skills. The work developed in the ALA by the Standards
Committee Subcommittee to Develop Guidelines for Library Services for
People with Mental Retardation (1999) sets forth the common service
needs for patrons with intellectual disabilities, as well as best
practices for libraries to meet these needs. The guidelines emphasise
the greater need for individual help that people with mental retardation
will have, and how librarians should respond with patience and eagerness
to help their patrons find the resources they need. They also provide a
guiding philosophy and set of values, that people with mental
retardation are still individuals with full lives that they take full
part in guiding, and that libraries can and should meet the varied
interests and needs of these individuals just as they do with all of
their other patrons.

Linda Lucas Walling (2001) sets out similar guidelines for public
libraries and how they may help patrons with intellectual disabilities.
She also includes possible methods for staff training, such as how to
use people-first language and demonstrating appropriate behaviour. The
article points out that many people with mental retardation, as well as
several other disabilities, live in a group home or with long-term care,
and do not often have the chance to get out. In order to best serve
these members of the community, it is vital to appropriately market the
library so that people know they have the library as an available
resource. Walling and the Guidelines above include detailed sections on
collection development. They point out that people with mental
retardation are often at a low reading level, but they are nonetheless
adults with adult interests. This dichotomy creates a major challenge
for collection development, and libraries must be careful to include
works that are within the capabilities of their patrons, while still
providing the varied content that their patrons will want.

The most important aspect of this training is not in collection
development, or in developing programs. It is in attitude. Norlin (1995)
describes his experience with people with intellectual disabilities. One
person with mental retardation declared "We're not stupid, you know",
and do not appreciate being treated as if they are (p. 181). The biggest
obstacle to providing services for people with developmental
disabilities is an attitude that they are not worth the time and the
effort, or that they are not able to use the services. This is also the
most difficult aspect to address. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa
(1999) spend a great deal of time on this, including describing the
problems a poor attitude can create. The authors include a questionnaire
directors can use to help gauge the true attitude of their staff, and
give suggestions for responding to many specific perceptions that people
might hold about patrons with developmental disabilities. Changing
attitudes and the need to address perceptions remains one of the least
researched aspects of providing service for people with developmental
disabilities, but it is the most important one to confront if service is
to improve.

The rewards for the library and the patrons can be great when a great
attitude is fostered, though. When people with mental retardation are
treated with respect and given the opportunities to find the information
they need, it can help them develop into more self-powered and
independent individuals. Hanson-Baldauf (2011) describes some of these
benefits. When people with intellectual disabilities are guided and
empowered to take control of their physical well-being, when they are
taught about their rights and are able to learn more on their own, when
they are helped to better socialize and interact with others, then they
are better able to take control of their own lives. They are more able
to fully join society, and can gain the self-determination to find their
own happiness.

## Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder is a disability that presents
itself in an individual as a difficulty in inhibiting distractions, as
well as great difficulty in keeping organized, and is usually combined
with being hyperactive or impulsive, being unable to sit still for very
long and having difficulty waiting or paying attention. Dr. Kutscher
(2005) further defines ADHD as a difficulty with inhibition more than
attention, as people with ADHD can focus on activities they enjoy for
long periods without problem, but when they should be paying attention
to something they find less captivation, they are unable to filter out
any distractions that are more interesting. People with ADHD face a
number of problems as a result of their disorder, including difficulties
either thinking ahead or learning from the past, a poor sense of time
and self-awareness, and a tendency to be overwhelmed with the world
around them. Anything that a library can do to help bring order into
this chaotic life can only be helpful.

Melissa Wright (2003) describes wyas to adapt existing library programs
to allow for children with ADHD. She suggests directly involving
children with ADHD in story times and other programs, allowing them to
hold props or tell part of the story. She also suggests adding variety,
including dancing and music and movement into different activities, and
when possible to give children with ADHD something to do with their
hands to keep them focussed. With regularity and predictability, Akin
and O'toole (2008) describe how libraries can be a haven for people with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder as well. They also describe
ways to adapt story times to meet the abilities of children with ADHD,
as well as methods for teaching library skills and computer skills to
children who have difficulty sitting still and focussing on one thing at
a time. Like all other aspects of serving people with disabilities, the
greatest need is for the people providing the service to have adequate
training.

Again, strong support and respect for individuals with a disability like
ADHD can help them develop in life afterward. Schwiebert, Sealander, and
Dennison (2002) describe a number of the emotional and social hardships
that people with ADHD may suffer. Librarians can help by giving them a
focus and a steady hand to keep them free of distraction as they pursue
their needs. Though it will always be a struggle, with skill development
people with ADHD can maintain control of themselves and their lives, and
libraries can provide an organized port on which to anchor that control.

## Autism Spectrum Disorders

The Autism Spectrum Disorders, including classical autism and Asperger's
syndrome, are pervasive developmental disabilities that are most
commonly identified by an extreme difficulty with social situations and
very narrow interests. Autism is sometimes confused with mental
retardation, but people on the autism spectrum have average or above
average mental abilities, but often have difficulty expressing it. Tony
Attwood (2007) describes how people on the autism spectrum will often
display repetitive motions and routines, and can become highly
distressed when anything disrupts their routine, and they often have
problems recognizing the emotions of others, and expressing their own.
It is not true that they do not feel emotion, but rather that they have
difficulty reading and displaying typical emotional cues and body
language.

Akin and MacKinney (2004) describe methods to serve children with Autism
Spectrum Disorders. They suggest keeping programs on regular and
repeating schedules, the use of stories to help develop social skills
and recognition, and the addition of peer tutoring to give children with
ASD one-on-one help to develop literacy and learning skills. Halvorson
(2006) focuses on the same group, and in particular on children with
Asperger's syndrome. She points out that the regularity of a library can
make it on ideal safe zone for a child with Asperger's. She also
recommends using stories to help social development, and goes on to
recommend that programming have regular cues and signals so that it is
easier to keep track of what is happening. The author also emphasizes
the opportunity for the library to be a resource for the parents of
children with Asperger's syndrome, as well as for the children
themselves.

Like all people, people with autism spectrum disorders simply want to be
treated as people, and given the help they need and the respect they
deserve. Ann Palmer (2006) describes how different coping techniques and
life strategies can serve a person with an autism spectrum disorder as
they go through life, and how they can succeed just as well as any other
person. Time management skills, learning about verbal and body language
cues, and friends and family for support can help bring them as far as
they would like to go. Libraries can help by providing an ordered world
where they can first feel safe, by helping to learn the everyday social
skills that are needed to function in today's world, and by supporting
all patrons with their interests and needs as they continue their
learning and growth.

## Conclusion

Developmental disabilities in a library setting remain poorly
researched, and teaching and training for librarians and staff remain
just as poor. If we are to give our best service to all of our patrons,
we must move forward. We must implement training for our colleagues, and
ourselves, helping us to move past any prejudices we may still hold, and
helping us to understand the disabilities involved. We can continue
creating new library programs, and adapting old ones, to better
accommodate and include all of our patrons. We can build our library
collections to better serve all of our patrons. We can better help all
of our patrons as they come to us for the information they need. Most
importantly of all, we can come to understand not just the disabilities,
but the people who live with those disabilities, and treat them with the
respect and care that all of our patrons deserve.

<div class="references">

## References

Akin, L., & MacKinney, D. (2004) Autism, literacy, and libraries: The 3
Rs = routine, repetition, and redundancy. *Children & libraries 2*(2),
35-43.

Akin, L., & O’toole, E. (2000). The order of the public library and the
disorder of attention deficit. *Public library quarterly, 18*(3/4),
69-80. doi:10.1300/J118v18n03\_10

Attwood, T. (2007). *The complete guide to Asperger's syndrome*.
Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

Barker, D. (2011). On the outside looking in: Public libraries serving
young people with disabilities. *Australasian public libraries and
information services, 24*(1), 9-16.

Brind’Amour, C. (2010). Special education students and the school media
center. *Current studies in librarianship, 30*(1/2), 49-67.

Feinberg, S., Jordan, B., Deerr, K., & Langa, M. (1999). *Including
families of children with special needs.* New York, NY: Neal-Schuman
Publishers.

Fitzgibbons, S. G. (1995). The school media cener's role in meeting the
needs of youth with disabilities. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.),
*Information services for people with developmental disabilities: The
library manager’s handbook.* (pp. 169-180). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Hanson-Baldauf, D. (2011). Empowering young adults with intellectual
disabilities through everyday life information. *Knowledge quest,
39*(3), 8-17.

Halvorson, H. (2006). Asperger’s Syndrome: How the public library can
address these special needs. *Children & libraries, 4*(3), 19-27.

Holmes, J. L. (2008). Patrons with developmental disabilities: a needs
assessment survey. *New Library World, 109*, 533-545.
doi:10.1108/03074800810921340

Irwin, M. M. (1995). Education. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.),
*Information services for people with developmental disabilities: The
library manager’s handbook.* (pp. 51-58). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Kutscher, M. L. (2005). *Kids in the syndrome mix of ADHD, LD,
Asperger's, Tourette's, Bipolar, and more! The one stop guide for
parents, teachers, and other professionals.* Philadelphia, PA: Jessica
Kingsley Publishers.

Mulliken, A., & Atkins, A. (2009). Academic library services for users
with developmental disabilities. *The reference librarian, 50*, 276-287.
doi:10.1080/02763870902873461

Norlin, D. (1995). Helping adults with mental retardation satisfy their
information needs. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.), *Information
services for people with developmental disabilities: The library
manager’s handbook.* (pp. 181-195). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Palmer, A. (2006). *Realizing the college dream with autism or Asperger
syndrome: A parent's guide to student success*. Philadelphia, PA:
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

Ross, V., & Akin, L. (2002). Children with learning disabilities and
public libraries: An E-survey of services, programs, resources and
training. *Public library quarterly, 21*(4), 9-18.
doi:10.1300/J118v21n04\_03

Schwiebert, V. L., Sealander, K. A., & Dennison, J. L. (2002).
Strategies for counselors working with high school students with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. *Journal of counseling and
development, 80*(1), 3-10.

Standards Committee Subcommittee to Develop Guidelines for Library
Services for People with Mental Retardation. (1999) *Guidelines for
services for people with mental retardation.* Chicago, IL: American
Library Association.

Walling, L. L. (1995). Doing what works: and introduction. In L.L.
Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.), *Information services for people with
developmental disabilities: The library manager’s handbook.* (pp.
xv-xxi). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Walling, L. L. (2004). Educating students to serve information seekers
with disabilities. *Journal of education for library and information
science, 45*(2), 137-148.

Walling, L. L. (2001). Public libraries and people with mental
retardation. *Public libraries, 40*(2), 115-120.

Walling, L. L., & Irwin, M. M. (Eds.). (1995). *Information services for
people with developmental disabilities: The library manager’s handbook.*
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Weingand, D. E. (2011). The invisible client: Meeting the needs of
persons with learning disabilities. *The reference librarian, 14*(31),
77-88. doi:10.1300/J120v14n31\_08

Wright, M. (2003). Adapting library programs for ADHD children.
*Mississippi libraries, 67*(1), 3-5.

</div>
