---
title: Helping Patrons with Developmental Disabilities
subtitle: Literature Review
date: Fall 2011
instructor: Robert Boyd
class: LIBR 200
abstract:|
    This literature review explores the research that has been published
    addressing developmental disabilities for libraries and information
    services. The subject as a whole is under researched, with relatively
    few articles and even fewer books covering the topic. Several laws
    enacted in the last twenty-five years provide a starting point, but the
    needs go far beyond the minimum required by law. Authors show the
    benefits both to people with disabilities and those without for
    providing service, but several surveys show that the level of service
    remains far too low. Several strategies for general service, as well as
    training for staff, are explored, followed by more specific program
    suggestions for people with specific disabilities such as Autism
    Spectrum Disorders or ADHD. Above all these strategies, though, the most
    important way to provide service is to encourage an attitude among staff
    that people with developmental disabilities are worthy of service, and a
    willingness to do what is needed to give that service.
...

The issue of serving people with developmental disabilities remains
poorly researched within the library and information science field.
Though the number of articles and studies continues to grow, the
handbook edited by Walling and Irwin (1995) remains one of the only full
texts on the subject. The editors along with the contributing authors
cover a wide range of topics, from general information about the
disabilities it covers to specific suggestions for services and programs
to offer. The book is, however, a bit out of date, and does not reflect
the most current needs of libraries. For example, Asperger's syndrome is
not mentioned once in the entire book, and Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder is mentioned only briefly, as the book was
compiled before these disorders became so widely diagnosed. The book
remains, nonetheless, the best single resource on the topic.

Any attempt to provide service for people with developmental
disabilities must take into account the laws that have been passed that
both mandate and regulte such service. Irwin (1995) provides an overview
of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and how it can
affect libraries. While the act primarily targets schools, libraries are
a significant source of learning and must accommodate persons with
disabilities. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999) go into more
detail about IDEA, as well as the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
and the National Education Goals: America 2000 Act. They describe what
these laws require of educators and libraries, down to the specific
reasonable accommodations that a library must provide.

Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999) go beyond the law and delve
into the moral and societal benefits that come from providing service
for people with devlopmental disabilities. They describe how people with
disabilities can become better motivated and gain greater life skills,
and can enjoy increased opportunities in their education, careers, and
in their social lives. People without disabilities, on the other hand,
can benefit by gaining a better understanding of the disabilities and
becoming more accepting of the diversity of ability around them. Walling
(1995) also advocates offering services for their own sake, recognizing
"children and adults with disabilities as people of ability who are
worthy of support and encouragement" (p. xv). Libraries should offer
services for people with developmental disabilities because it is right,
not because it is required.

There have been several studies attempting to measure how well libraries
currently serve people with developmental disabilities. Akin and Ross
(2002) conducted a survey to determine how well Texas public libraries
serve children with learning disabilities. They concluded that the
libraries they surveyed do not serve children with learning disabilities
adequately, and that a great deal more research and training is needed
to help serve this population. Holmes (2008) targeted her survey
directly toward people with developmental disabilities themselves, to
assess their information needs and how well they are being met with
libraries. She found that a large percentage of people with
developmental disabilities did use the library, but they overwhelmingly
went only for books, and many were unaware of the other services
offered. She suggested better outreach and tutoring so that this
population would know about the options available to them at the
library. Brind'Amour (2010) developed her survey toward school libraries
specifically. She found that there is very little training among school
librarians to help them serve students with developmental disabilities.
Beyond that, though many teacher librarians felt they were meeting the
needs of their students, special education teachers disagreed, and that
a large number of students with developmental disabilities did not use
the library. She found a great need for additional training and, again,
outreach so that people with disabilities are aware of the resource
available to them.

Fitzgibbons (1995) offers some insight for how school media centers can
provide service for their students with developmental disabilities. In
particular, the media center can help introduce students to information
and to information networks, can serve as an advocate and help change
attitudes about developmental disabilities, and can support and teach
literacy and learning skills. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999)
also address methods of training staff, developing collections, and
introducing new services for people with developmental disabilities.
They advocate developing collections that meet the specific needs of
children with special needs, including non-traditional materials such as
toys and games, as well as the creation of resource centers for parents
and professionals.

Many authors describe strategies and specific programs for individual
disabilities. Akin and MacKinney (2004) describe methods to serve
children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. They suggest keeping programs
on regular and repeating schedules, the use of stories to help develop
social skills and recognition, and the addition of peer tutoring to give
children with ASD one-on-one help to develop literacy and learning
skills. Halvorson (2006) focuses on the same group, and in particular on
children with Asperger's syndrome. She points out that the regularity of
a library can make it on ideal safe zone for a child with Asperger's.
She also recommends using stories to help social development, and goes
on to recommend that programming have regular cues and signals so that
it is easier to keep track of what is happening. The author also
emphasizes the opportunity for the library to be a resource for the
parents of children with Asperger's syndrome, as well as for the
children themelves.

Just as an ordered library can be a haven for children with ASD, Akin
and O'toole (2008) describe how it can be a haven for people with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder as well. They describe ways to
adapt story times to meet the abilities of children with ADHD, as well
as methods for teaching library skills and computer skills to children
who have difficulty sitting still and focussing on one thing at a time.
Like all other aspects of serving people with disabilities, the greatest
need is for the people providing the service to have adequate training.

The most important aspect of this training is not in collection
development, or in developing programs. It is in attitude. Norlin (1995)
describes his experience with people with intellectual disabilities.
They may have mental retardation, but they are not stupid, and do not
appreciate being treated as if they are. The biggest obstacle to
providing services for people with developmental disabilities is an
attitude that they are not worth the time and the effort, or that they
are not able to use the services. This is also the most difficult aspect
to address. Feinberg, Jordan, Deerr, and Langa (1999) spend a great deal
of time on this, including describing the problems a poor attitude can
create. The authors include a questionaire directors can use to help
guage the true attitude of their staff, and give suggestions for
responding to many specific perceptions that people might hold about
patrons with developmental disabilities. Changing attitudes and the need
to address perceptions remains one of the least researched aspects of
providing service for people with developmental disabilities, but it is
the most important one to confront if service is to improve.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Akin, L., & MacKinney, D. (2004) Autism, literacy, and libraries: The 3
Rs = routine, repetition, and redundancy. *Children & libraries 2*(2),
35-43.

Akin, L., & O’toole, E. (2000). The order of the public library and the
disorder of attention deficit. *Public library quarterly, 18*(3/4),
69-80. doi:10.1300/J118v18n03\_10

Brind’Amour, C. (2010). Special education students and the school media
center. *Current studies in librarianship, 30*(1/2), 49-67.

Feinberg, S., Jordan, B., Deerr, K., & Langa, M. (1999). *Including
families of children with special needs.* New York, NY: Neal-Schuman
Publishers.

Fitzgibbons, S. G. (1995). The school media cener's role in meeting the
needs of youth with disabilities. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.),
*Information services for people with developmental disabilities: The
library manager’s handbook.* (pp. 169-180). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Halvorson, H. (2006). Asperger’s Syndrome: How the public library can
address these special needs. *Children & libraries, 4*(3), 19-27.

Holmes, J. L. (2008). Patrons with developmental disabilities: a needs
assessment survey. *New Library World, 109*, 533-545.
doi:10.1108/03074800810921340

Irwin, M. M. (1995). Education. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.),
*Information services for people with developmental disabilities: The
library manager’s handbook.* (pp. 51-58). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Mulliken, A., & Atkins, A. (2009). Academic library services for users
with developmental disabilities. *The reference librarian, 50*, 276-287.
doi:10.1080/02763870902873461

Norlin, D. (1995). Helping adults with mental retardation satisfy their
information needs. In L.L. Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.), *Information
services for people with developmental disabilities: The library
manager’s handbook.* (pp. 181-195). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Ross, V., & Akin, L. (2002). Children with learning disabilities and
public libraries: An E-survey of services, programs, resources and
training. *Public library quarterly, 21*(4), 9-18.
doi:10.1300/J118v21n04\_03

Walling, L. L. (1995). Doing what works: and introduction. In L.L.
Walling & M.M. Irwin (Eds.), *Information services for people with
developmental disabilities: The library manager’s handbook.* (pp.
xv-xxi). Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Walling, L. L., & Irwin, M. M. (Eds.). (1995). *Information services for
people with developmental disabilities: The library manager’s handbook.*
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

</div>

