---
class: LIBR 266
date: '2013-03-24'
title: Collection Analysis of the Roseville Public Library
...

Community Data
--------------

The Roseville library primarily serves the city of Roseville, as well as
the nearby smaller suburbs of St. Paul, MN. According to recent census
data (United States Census Bureau, 2013) more than half of all
households have an income higher than \$50,000, with a median family
income of just over \$82,000. Less than 20% of the total population is
under 18 years old, significantly fewer than national average. Because
of this, and a relatively high number of senior citizens, the average
age of Roseville's citizens is higher at 41 years than most of the
surrounding state.

11.5% of the local population is foreign born, higher than the average
for the state, though lower than some nearby communities. That foreign
born population is an important part of the community. Minnesota has the
largest population in the United States of both Hmong and Somali
immigrants, as well as significant populations of Vietnamese and Laotian
immigrants, nearly all of these refugees (The Advocates for Human
Rights, 2006).

The high median income suggests a likely high percentage of adult
library users. The low number of children and teens means they are a
smaller pool of library users than usual. The high number of immigrants
suggests a need for materials in other languages.

Collection Analysis
-------------------

Ramsey County as a whole and the Roseville branch in particular have
very high circulation, the highest of any library in the state. Library
use peaked in 2008, but has dropped off a bit in the last few years
(Ramsey County Library, 2011). Nonetheless, usage remains very high
among all users, with an average turnover of 8.55 for all library items.
The children's collection is especially busy. Though children and youth
make up less than 20% of the local population, they account for 38% of
total library circulation.

| Roseville Library      |           |
|:-----------------------|----------:|
| Print Materials        |    194,109|
| Video Materials        |     21,866|
| Audio Materials        |     15,178|
| Adult Circulation      |  1,226,022|
| Children's Circulation |    751,028|
| Total Circulation      |  1,977,050|

**Data sourced from Minnesota Department of Education (2011).**

Perusing the stacks at the library shows some interesting comparisons of
the different parts of the collection. Though young adults (11-18) make
up only slightly less of the population than younger children, the young
adult area is much smaller and more tightly packed than the children's
area. The children's area has a large number of picture books out and
easily browsable, with a relatively small number of picture books. The
teen stacks are much smaller overall, as well as being far smaller than
the adult stacks. There is no statistical data available for young adult
circulation, but from the materials available it is likely much smaller
than the children's collection.

The audio and video materials are both crammed into far too small an
area. These media account for a significant part of the collection
(nearly 20% of total items), but are given very little space. Though
circulation is high for the DVDs in particular, it is not as high as in
other branches.

Foreign language materials are almost nonexistent. A search of the
library's catalog reveals fewer than one hundred items of Somali
interest in the library's collection, and only about a dozen of those in
the Somali language. Hmong and other Easy Asian materials account for an
even smaller number of items. There are more Spanish language materials,
even though Spanish speakers make up a smaller part of the population
than either of these other two groups.

Information Needs
-----------------

The Roseville library serves a community with a relatively small
percentage of children and young adults. Though children's materials
still account for a significant portion of circulation, nonetheless
there is a greater need for materials for adults than fir children. The
average age of citizens is high, and computer access of materials is
low, suggesting that print materials and materials for learning
technology should be a focus.

Among the youth served, young adults make up an equal number of patrons
as children, suggesting that materials geared toward them should also be
roughly equal. Among children, picture books are in high demand, and
need to be maintained and refreshed regularly. Among all age brackets,
DVDs are also in high demand, and should be kept full and current with
regular new releases.

The high percentage of foreign born citizens suggests a need for
materials both in their native languages, as well as materials for
learning English as a second language. Materials relating to their
cultures should also make up a part of the collection. There are
particular needs for materials for Hmong and Somali immigrants.

How Well the Community is Served
--------------------------------

Though the Roseville library serves some of its patrons very well,
others get left behind, and it shows signs of a collection that has not
kept up with the changing demographics of the last couple decades. The
best served group for the library are older adults, which is appropriate
as they are by far the largest proportion of patrons. The non-fiction
and fiction stacks are kept full and well maintained, and current
bestsellers are kept up to date with enough copies. There is also a
large and current collection of materials for learning computers and
software, often needed by older adults who have less experience with
computers than younger people. The adult collection is rounded out by a
good collection of current periodicals and newspapers.

The collection also serves young children well. The picture book
collection, in particular, is large and extensive, with regular influx
of new materials. The high circulation figures for children's materials
as compared to total per capita circulation is a strong sign that this
part of the collection is successful. Young adults, however, are not as
well represented by the collection. It is smaller than the children's
collection, despite an equal number of patrons. While the young adult
fiction is kept current, the overall collection is small and should be
built up to better serve this part of the community.

The DVD collection for the library is, if anything, almost too
extensive. There is a large number of items, with more being added
regularly as new releases are purchased. Little is done to truly
maintain this collection, however. Circulation for DVDs is lower than at
other branches, despite high interest from all age groups for them. This
collection needs to be a larger part of the overall development plan,
including for weeding and reevaluation. As it is, the DVD collection is
constantly grown, but the lack of maintenance keeps it from meeting the
needs of patrons who wish to use it.

Finally, the largest need that is not being met is in the area of
foreign language and foreign interest materials. The Somali, Hmong, and
other immigrants make up nearly 12% of the population, but they are
represented by a negligible part of the library collection. In order to
fulfill the needs of all its patrons, the Roseville library needs to
grow this part of its collection. Items in the relevant languages, items
if English that are related to the relevant cultures, and items for
learning English as a second language would all be valuable additions.
Audio and video items should also be remembered. If these parts of the
collection are built up, then a much higher proportion of Roseville's
citizens can feel like welcome patrons at the library, and will eb more
willing to support the library and give feedback for the best way to
continue developing the collection in the future.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Minnesota Department of Education. (2011). Ramsey county library:
Minnesota public multiple library report - 2011. Retrieved from
<http://education.state.mn.us/library/2011/M0700.pdf>

Ramsey County Library. (2011). 2011 residential survey [slideshow].
Retrieved from
<http://www.rclreads.org/sites/default/files/rcl/images/About-FAQs/2011%20Ramsey%20County%20Library%20survey.pdf>

The Advocates for Human Rights. (2006). The facts: Immigration in
minnesota. Retrieved from
<http://www.energyofanation.org/sites/25e1f498-741c-478a-8a08-aa486d8533a5/uploads/immigration_in_minnesota.pdf>

United States Census Bureau. (2013). Roseville city, minnesota
quickLinks. Retrieved from
<http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/27/2755852lk.html>

</div>
