---
class: LIBR 266
date: '05/13/13'
title: 'Making Peace with E-Books in Public Libraries'
...

Libraries and publishers, for decades staunch allies with the goal of
connecting books with readers, have recently come into conflict. A new
product, a new *kind* of book, has come onto the scene, and neither side
can agree on the best way to make it available. E-books are still books,
they are just a new format and still are simply meant to be read.
However, they cannot be treated the same as any printed book, as
libraries and publishers both are learning.

E-books cost very little to create, with no costs for paper or printing,
and can potentially last forever. Publishers are struggling to make use
of this format while still making a profit, while libraries are
struggling to offer E-books to their patrons while being stymied by
technology and publisher-demanded limits. These two sides will never
agree as long as they insist on treated E-books as inherently the same
as regular physical books, which must be purchased one at a a time and
regularly replaced. Treating E-books as a service, and in particular
treating an E-book catalog as one service to which a library can
subscribe, is the most sensible way to think about E-books, and the best
way to allow libraries to carry E-books for their patrons while still
allowing publishers to make a profit on their catalog.

Background
----------

E-Books have exploded in popularity over the last several years. While
digital formats for books have existed for as long as digital formats
themselves, electronic books were for years considered a niche market at
best, with little demand or excitement (Buczynski, 2010). With the
invention of the Amazon Kindle and other, similar devices that allow for
comfortable reading of digital books, that attitude changed. E-Books
have been steadily growing in popularity ever since, and now they often
outsell print books. E-Books remain a costly purchase for many
consumers, however, with prices often the same as a print copy despite
the lack of manufacturing costs, so along with the popularity of E-books
has come a need for ways in which to borrow them, freely and legally.

This need has been difficult to meet, for a variety of reasons. A study
by the Pew Research Center (Zickuhr, Rainie, Purcell, Madden, & Brenner,
2012) showed that most Americans do not even realize that E-books are
available at their local library, and only a small percentage of people
who read E-books had borrowed one from their library. Among those that
had, while they liked the selection of E-books available, were
dissatisfied with the experience because of wait lists, software
incompatibility, and titles they wanted being unavailable. Even so,
patron borrowing of E-books is increasing rapidly as some of these
problems are ironed out.

The core of many of the problems (and some of the solutions) with
E-books comes from their nature as electronic files instead of physical
objects. As such, libraries do not own a physical copy of an E-book, but
rather license the use of the file from the publisher. There are several
different models of licensing E-books, each with their own challenges.
At first libraries would simply purchase an E-book file, and could use
it as they pleased. The first limits were placed in 1998 when the E-book
distributer NetLibrary introduced a model where only one patron could
use the file---or "borrow" the book---at one time (Buczynski, 2010).
Other models include subscriptions to whole collections of books for a
set period of time, limited licenses that only allow a book to be
"borrowed" a set number of times, and Patron Demand models that
automatically purchase an E-book for a library only when a patron has
begun using it (Fischer, Wright, Clatanoff, Barton, & Shreeves, 2012).

Controversy
-----------

There is no standard model for how E-books should be licensed, how much
they should cost, or how to balance the demand for freely available
E-books with the need for publishers and authors to make a profit on
their works. With no standard, there has inevitably been disagreement
and outright conflict between libraries and publishers about the best
way to handle E-books. E-book prices are wildly inconsistent from one
publisher to the next, and even at different times in a publisher's
recent history. Many librarians feel that publishers are dismissive or
outright hostile to libraries, implementing models that are too
demanding or expensive for libraries to use. Some publishers feel that
libraries have unrealistic expectations of what can feasibly be done,
and that library lending of E-books will only hurt their other sales. At
least two major U.S. publishers simply refuse outright to allow their
E-books to be lent by libraries without exception. (Stross, 2011).

One recent decision that has caused conflict was the choice made by
HarperCollins to limit any E-book purchased by a library to a maximum of
26 loans, after which the book would need to be purchased again. Hadro &
Kelley (2011) describe the situation, along with the reactions of upset
librarians. Many librarians felt that this was unreasonable and
arbitrary, and many libraries and library consortia refuse to purchase
E-books (or even print books) from HarperCollins because of this
decision. HarperCollins counters that physical books would not last
forever and would need to be replaced eventually, and that allowing
unlimited loans of E-books would eat into the sales of those same books
to customers who can simply borrow it for free as much as they like. For
now, there is no agreement as to which position is best.

Another problem faced by libraries is the sheer cost associated with
purchasing (and repurchasing) E-books. While libraries generally receive
a discount when purchasing print books, E-books are usually sold at list
price, or even with an added expense because of the licensing. As
described by Fialkoff (2012), RandomHouse recently raised the library
price of their E-books by a very large margin, and many libraries have
said that they will no longer be able to afford to purchase from them.
Even more disturbing are the accusations that publishers have conspired
to keep E-book prices high. The U.S. Department of Justice launched an
Antitrust lawsuit against several publishers, alleging that they had
"fixed" the prices of their E-books at a higher level than they had been
sold at before (Harris, 2012). This lawsuit was in relation to
single-user purchases through Apple's online bookstore, but it does
raise worrying questions about the pricing of E-books to libraries, as
well.

The root of these problems with E-books stem largely from a mental
attitude of E-books that does not reflect what E-books really are. Both
publishers and libraries attempt to treat E-books in a way similar to
physical, printed copies of books, and this mental construct does not
work in the long run. Libraries expect to purchase a book, and then have
nearly free reign to lend that book for as long as it lasts. E-books, as
electronic files, could in theory last forever, and such behavior is not
fair to publishers and authors. Publishers, however, have responded by
imposing arbitrary limits on E-books, maintaining the illusion that they
are like physical books. Publishers limited an E-book from being used by
more than one patron at a time, or (like HarperCollins) place an upper
limit on the number of times it can be borrowed at all. Again, though,
this is an illusion, as E-books are computer files that can be copied
indefinitely, and patrons do not understand the waitlists and
unavailable titles that are a result of this illusion when they know it
is simply a computer file.

There are other models that avoid these problems. E-books can be
provided to libraries and library patrons in ways that reflect their
basic nature as computer files, while still allowing publishers to
collect a reasonable profit on their property. In order to make E-books
in libraries work, we must stop trying to force them into being products
that are bought and sold, and recognize as a service and content that is
licensed for use. Most libraries already have systems and services in
place that reflect this same model, not surprising as these systems
exist to solve a similar problem. Libraries need to allow access to a
great wealth of information, much of which will never be needed at any
one library, but cannot afford to buy all of that information piecemeal.
For periodicals and articles, this is solved by *subscribing* to article
databases and allowing their patrons access to that service.

Subscription Model
------------------

Subscription based services are nothing new to libraries. Libraries,
both public and academic, have subscribed to online encyclopedias,
reference sources, and article databases for decades. The platform is
well established and familiar to libraries and patrons alike. Much like
with E-books, these resources are only "owned" by the library for a
limited period of time. Rather that paying for each article or magazine
one at a time, libraries subscribe to all available articles for a set
period of time. The subscriptions are tailored to the needs and budget
of each library or consortium, based on which subjects and periodicals
are most likely to be needed by the library's users. A similar model
could be used with general purpose E-books for public libraries.

Subscription based access to E-books already exists in academic
libraries. ProQuest and EBSCO, well-established vendors for article
databases as well, have had success with academic E-book subscription
services (Buczynski, 2010). Similar to their other products, their
E-book services are tailored to specific libraries to keep costs down
while offering the content that is most needed and relevant for those
libraries. Academic E-books are especially well suited for a
subscription model, as academic texts are often made obsolete by newer
editions. This allows libraries to keep up to date with the latest
material available without incurring the overhead of buying each new
edition separately as it is released.

ProQuest, with their Ebrary line, has even begun to offer recent and
backlist fiction for public libraries, as described by Kelley (2012).
Ebrary only scratches the surface of what is possible for public
library-focussed subscriptions, though. Ebrary offers a single
monolithic package of several thousand recent and backlist books, and
the only way to customize it is to add additional books one at a time,
though this process can be automated based on patron demand. To truly
replace the current one-E-book-at-a-time purchase model, a subscription
model must be more customizable to meed the needs of each library, just
like the article database subscriptions are. A library could build their
own subscription out of common pieces, such as "top 100 bestsellers",
"backlist science fiction", and "award winning childrens books". Most
importantly, library lending should be unlimited within the subscription
period, or at least have reasonable limits based on the entire
subscription instead of individual titles. For example, a library could
pay a set price for 5,000 book check-outs, but it would not matter if
they were 5,000 separate books or 500 check-outs each of the 10 most
popular, the cost is the same.

Subscription based on-demand models for offering content are becoming
more common and accepted, and are familiar and understood by patrons.
Where once people would have to purchase a movie or album in order to
enjoy it in their home (or check it out from the library), now many
users are subscribing to a service so they can listen to or watch
whatever they like at any given time. Music streaming services are
gaining popularity over the purchase of CDs or MP3s. Thousands of people
stream movies and television shows using Netflix or Hulu rather that
buying their own copy. There are even single-user subscription services
for E-books, such as described by Polanka (2013). Patrons are becoming
used to this model, and understand how it works. In particular, they
understand that if their subscription ends, their access to the content
also ends; that they are temporarily "renting" or licensing the content
without any sort of permanent ownership. They would thus understand such
a model if it was used by a library for their E-book collection, far
better than they would understand the arbitrary and artificial limits
currently set on library E-books by publishers.

Shortcomings
------------

Subscription based E-book services are not perfect, though they are in
my opinion the best option available for supporting E-books in a public
library. There are several potential challenges to overcome. Being able
to customize a subscription would carry the same challenges as any other
collection development process, namely needing to decide what would be
used and what would not. It can be difficult to know ahead of time which
E-books would be popular and circulated, and which would languish
unused. Subscription packages would reduce this problem compared to
purchasing each E-book individually, but not eliminate it. One possible
response is to subscribe to a smaller "core" collection, and only add
others as they are requested by patrons. This is the system currently
used by Ebrary, but here are pitfalls described by Fischer et al.
(2012). In particular, Patron Driven Acquisition must be carefully
monitored and planned-for, or it can easily overrun the budget.

Another potential problem, inherent in a subscription model, is that the
library does not *own* any of the E-books to which it subscribes. If the
subscription ends because of budget cuts, or if the vendor changes the
subscription for whatever reason, then E-books could become unavailable
suddenly. Patrons would by and large understand a subscription model,
but would still be displeased if an E-book they thought about one day
was no longer available the next. This is an unavoidable aspect of
subscription based service, but still offers greater service for our
patrons than an E-book that becomes unavailable because it was
checked-out too many times.

Conclusion
----------

A subscription based model of E-book service for a public library would
certainly be a challenge. The greatest challenge would simply be to
convince publishers to use such an unfamiliar system, and that they
could still protect their intellectual property and their profits
without compromising the service available to library patrons. It will
be an uphill battle, but one that is worth the fight. Right now the big
publishers are wary or outright hostile to the thought of their E-books
being lent out from libraries, but they do themselves and their readers
a disservice by making it difficult, expensive, or impossible. Libraries
are a publisher's greatest customers, and greatest advocates when a good
book comes along. By developing and sticking with a subscription model
for E-book lending, publishers can allow their readers the chance to
find books they may never have found otherwise, and libraries can offer
their patrons the service they have come to expect and deserve.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Buczynski, J. A. (2010). Library ebooks: Some can’t find them, others
find and don’t know what they are. *Internet Reference Services
Quarterly*, *15*(1), 11–19.
doi:[10.1080/10875300903517089](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10875300903517089)

Fialkoff, F. (2012). First Harper, now Random. *Library Journal*,
*137*(7), 8.

Fischer, K. S., Wright, M., Clatanoff, K., Barton, H., & Shreeves, E.
(2012). Give ’em what they want: A one-year study of unmediated
patron-driven acquisition of e-books. *College & Research Libraries*,
*73*(5), 469–492.

Hadro, J., & Kelley, M. (2011). HarperCollins: 26-loan cap on library
ebooks. *Library Journal*, *136*(6), 16–18.

Harris, C. (2012). Department of justice files antitrust suit over
ebooks. *American Libraries*, *43*(5/6), 19.

Kelley, M. (2012). Ebrary finds public niche. *Library Journal*,
*137*(11), 26–28.

Polanka, S. (2013). Ebook access: Business mmodel for subscription
services. *Online Searcher*, *37*(2), 65–67.

Stross, R. (2011). Publishers vs. libraries: An e-book tug of war. *The
New York Times*, BU3.

Zickuhr, K., Rainie, L., Purcell, K., Madden, M., & Brenner, J. (2012).
Libraries, patrons, and e-books. *Pew Internet Libraries*. Retrieved
from
<http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/06/22/libraries-patrons-and-e-books/>

</div>
