---
title: Ramsey County Library OPAC Compared to Anoka County Library
class: LIBR 202-12
instructor: Nancy McKay
date: Fall 2011
abstract: |
    The OPAC of the Ramsey County Library is evaluated, and compared to the
    OPAC of the neighboring Anoka County Library. RCL, which uses
    Aquabrowser Library, is found to have a more modern and usable
    interface, which is easy to use for a variety of possible patrons of the
    library.
...

In the Twin Cities metro area, there is an experiment taking place
within the dozens of libraries spread throughout the area. All of them
use web based Online Public Access Catalogs, but some are using tried
and true catalogs that they have been using for years, while others are
leaping into using a new, supposedly modern system that is kept separate
from the other software on which their libraries run. This paper will
examine one of these libraries to see what impact the new system is
having.

##Context

The Ramsey County Library system is one of the central library systems
in Minnesota. First founded in the 1920s, the system has grown over the
decades until it now encompasses eight branches in North St. Paul and
nearby suburbs, and serves more than 1.8 million visitors each year. The
Ramsey County system serves as the backbone for the Metropolitan Library
Service Agency, or MELSA, which encompasses over 100 library branch
locations throughout the Twin Cities metro area. Despite being smaller
than the other library systems within MELSA, the Ramsey County libraries
are burier and with a higher circulation per square foot than any other
library in MELSA. With this large a population to serve, the Online
Public Access Catalog for Ramsay County must by robust and up to date to
be useful.

Ramsey County has been pushing for modernization over the last several
years, and has one of the most up to date library systems in the state.
Though the members of MELSA collaborate with one another, they do not
share a catalog or Integrated Library System, and can be quite different
from one another. The Ramsey County library system as a whole runs on
top of the Horizon ILS, from Sirsi/Dynix. Within the last couple years,
Ramsey County added the Aquabrowser Library catalog search engine,
replacing their older iPac catalog. According to Nicole Harold,
technical services manager for the Ramsey County Library, the OPAC
stores all of its bibliographic data in MARC format. Most of the data is
retrieved from OCLC through a subscription to OCLC Connexion Client,
though all metadata is verified and, if needed, edited before being
added to the OPAC. Additional data, outside the purview of MARC, is
supplied by SyndeticsICE.

The Ramsey County OPAC will be compared to the OPAC of sister system
Anoka County Libraries. Anoka county does have Aquabrowser as an option,
but the main interface remains with an older OPAC tied into their ILS
from Sirsi/Dynix. While the systems are loosely related through their
connection to MELSA, the OPACs do not connect to one another and have
discrepancies in the data they do have in common. Currently the only to
receive an item from one system to the other is through
inter-library-loan via the Minnesota Link gateway.

##Analysis

At first blush Aquabrowser, as used in the Ramsey County library system,
appears to be a thoroughly modern search engine. It starts with a signle
search bar, similar to a familiar Google search. This search bar accepts
search terms from any part on the data record, so a search for "Stephen
King" will retrieve records both by and about the author. The search
results are ranked by relevance, though there is little indication as to
why this particular order is considered relevant. Besides the standard
search engine, hits can be narrowed using the refinement options on the
right side the screen, as well as a tag cloud to the left of the main
search results. The subject heading within the metadata of a record can
also be followed as links, for additional browsing options.

The page for each record in the most outstanding piece of the catalog.
Each record includes full metadata (much of which may be followed for
additional browsing). One aspect that greatly stands out is the added
data from the subscription to SyndeticsICE. This allows each record to
have full cover art of each book or other resource, as well as
publishers descriptions and critical reviews from periodicals. On top of
that, users who log in using their library card can rate each resource
using stars ratings, as well as add personal tags to every item in the
database. These tags, besides allowing users to keep track of things in
their own way, can also be summarized using a tag cloud, and individual
tags can be clicked through to find other items with the same tage.

One frustration I encountered is the fact that not everything is
searchable using the system. Only the Author, Title, and Subject fields
appear to be directly indexed and easy to search, as well as the user
generated tag. Often I will find another field that would be useful to
search or browse by, for example the Awards field might list a Hugo
award or a Newbery medal on some books. However, I could not click on
the data point to search for all Newbery medal winning books. Instead, I
would only be able to search for a Newbery medal using the keyword
search. The remaining fields appear to be used as part of a full-text
search of the remaining data, but it does not rank these items very well
and it can be very frustrating attempting to find a particular item or
items if the only search terms you have do not fall neatly under Author,
Title, Subject Headings.

##Comparison

The Anoka County library OPAC feels very different, and in many ways
much more frustrating than the Aquabrowser based system used by Ramsey
County Library. The catalog does allow keyword searches, but they are
much less intuitive then those through Aquabrowser. The resources
retrieved come in an order that feels unsorted, or if they are sorted it
is using a much less refined method of choosing relevancy. There is
little rhyme or reason to the results page, and there are no ways to
refine the search. The only way to improve the search is to improve the
keywords you type into the search box and hope they get you closer to
your destination.

The Anoka County library OPAC does include critical reviews of the item
found, though from a different source than the reviews that appear on
the Ramsey County Library's OPAC. Anoka County also has something that
Ramsey County doesn't have, and that is relevant book recommendations.
At the bottom of the page representing a single record, several
suggested books based on characteristics of the first book are displayed
and linked to, so to speak. This allows much simpler browsing from one
book to the next, and in many ways is much more intuitive than the tags
used by Ramsey County. Though it is a minor thing, the Anoka County
library also allows you to see the exact MARC data of a record. This
extra detail is nice for a MLIS student trying to learn more about the
Metadata standards, and does not appear to be possible. All in all,
though the Anoka County library has a few features that are nice, the
Aquabrowser interface in the Ramsey County Public library is far and
away the superior searching experience.

##User Test

For the user test, I attempted to create a variety of searches that
would be plausible for normal users of the system, but might trip up the
OPAC with the search. I included both fiction and non-fiction, narrow
focus and broad, in the hopes of testing the system as well as possible
using only a few questions. The searches were for:

-   Recent Newbery medal winners

-   Books on coping with ADHD, for adults, not for parents of children
    with ADHD

-   An audiobook of a horror bestseller

-   Information of during taxes for someone who is self-employed

For the testers, there were a fourteen year old girl, a college educated
woman of thirty-three, and a retail manager of fifty. None of them had
any great difficulty with the searches. I already mentioned that the
extra metadata fields, such as Award, cannot be browsed. They are,
however, included in a full-text search done using the keyword search
option. Each of the participants used a simple and direct approach to
searching, likely inspired by years of using Google. A search for
"newbery medal 2011" yielded up a list of all that year's winners, with
only a couple false positives. Similarly for the non-fiction, a search
for "self employed taxes 2011" came up with several relevant books as
the first couple results. None of these searches would have worked in an
older style OPAC, with rigid data fields and very specific formats for
how each one could be entered. Now with a modern search engine, based at
least in part on the easiness of Google, such a search only takes
seconds to yield positive results.

The users were all quite satisfied with the searches they made and the
results they uncovered. One was particularly impressed with the refining
fields of the right hand side, allowing searches to be narrowed down
easily from a very large group down to something manageable. One, the
teenage girl, liked the list of recommended books included on the main
page, and said she would have liked them to be better integrated with
the rest of the catalog, so one could search by "recommendations". All
in all, though, they said they were highly satisfied with the results.

##Evaluation

The Ramsey County library OPAC has been made as simple to use as
possible for its wide variety of potential users. But it achieves this
by combining nearly all of its searchable data together into one big
searchable lump, and sorting out only the parts it needs. It has
improved relevance on old searches, rather than losing any, by giving up
the rigid system of sovereign metadata that can only be searched just
right, in precise ways, or it will not work at all. Moving away from
that system, and toward a more modern system with a modern search
engine, there is no need to worry such detail, as it is all handled
behind the scenes. The user, whether a thirteen year old girl or an
elderly grandmother, can use the system with equal ease and find what
they are looking for without trouble.

That ease of searching makes each search very efficient. Though there
may be some false positives are extra items that are irrelevant to the
search, a simple refinement using the options on the side can narrow the
results down quickly and effectively to find the desired items. It is
very user friendly and intuitive, usable by anyone with any experience
using a computer. The user test showed that it was equally easy for
younger people and older people, with results that match the search
criteria being found without any difficulty.

Right now MELSA is evaluating Aquabrowser and its usage in all of the
libraries in the Twin Cities, with the need for a decision in late 2012
regarding whether to sponsor its use or not. I think it would be a
powerful addition to each library's arsenal.

<div class="references">

##References

Anoka County Library. (2011). Retrieved from:
<http://www.anoka.lib.mn.us/>

AquaBrowser. (2011). Retrieved from:
<http://www.serialsolutions.com/discovery/aquabrowser/>

Ramsey County Libraries. (2011). Retrieved from:
<http://www.rclreads.org/>

</div>
