---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
class: LIBR 232
csl: 'apa.csl'
date: '2013-03-06'
instructor: 'Dr. Ruphina Ozoh'
title: 'Changes and Challenges for Libraries in the Twenty-First Century'
...

It sometimes seems like the only constant in the twenty-first century is
change. Technology is changing everyone's lives in small ways and large,
and it is changing both the services libraries can offer and the
services patrons expect. The political climate is changing the way
libraries can offer their services, and there is a great deal of back
and forth challenge between offering services and complying with the
law. The economy is changing what services libraries can afford to
offer, while at the same time increasing demand for those services and
more. Dougherty (2002) describes how important it is for libraries to
plan for change, while most libraries currently only react to change.
Large corporations spend years and millions of dollars to prepare for
changes that they may not even be aware of. Planning for change---any
change---is not just good practice, but absolutely necessary for any
organization that intends to stay successful and relevant in the coming
years. This is perhaps the greatest challenge facing libraries, and at
the heart of many other challenges here at the beginning of the
twenty-first century, namely that libraries must be ready to face
whatever comes while offering the best service possible, instead of
simply trying to keep up with what comes.

Technology Changing Services
----------------------------

The most obvious changes facing libraries are the rapid changes in
technology. Some of the classic services of a public library, book
circulation and reference, are different thanks to modern technology in
ways that never would have been possible years ago. Libraries most deal
with competition from the internet, search engines, and online services,
but at the same time must embrace those same technologies to remain
current and relevant for today's patron. Many of today's patrons are
tech savvy, and will expect the same from the library, while of course
many other patrons are all but stuck several decades behind, and will
need help from librarians who can navigate new technology without
talking down to them. In this climate, libraries face the difficulty of
knowing and embracing new technology while convincing their patrons that
"older" methods are still available and still worthwhile.

Reference service is the aspect of public library service that has
probably changed the most with new technology, both in expectations from
patrons and the capabilities of librarians. With that technology, the
single biggest challenge for reference service is simply to get patrons
to use it. The internet has become competition for the reference desk.
<span>O’Gorman</span> & Trott (2009) describe this phenomenon, noting
that many users today prefer the immediate results available from Google
and Wikipedia over the slower answers that come from a reference
librarian. They write, also, that many users believe the information
they find online is just as accurate and complete as what they would get
at a library, and while this may be true for simple questions, with any
research of significance a reference librarian will usually be able to
find more authoritative and more in-depth information that is available
in the internet. The challenge, then, is one of marketing, and informing
users and potential users that this service still exists and is still a
better resource than searching the internet blindly.

That is not to say that internet sources are useless. Indeed, to be
fully effective a modern librarian must be aware of and embrace current
internet based resources. Many standard reference sources are now only
available online, or are at least easier to search and index online than
their print editions. As well, the modern Online Public Access Catalog
(OPAC) does far more than simply replace old card catalogs. Emanuel
(2009) describes how modern OPAC software allow for broad searching more
familiar to users of modern search engines, and include added value with
social networking, user reviews, and public tagging, which allow users
to rate and choose materials with more relevant information than just
author, title, publisher. These nextgen catalogs include connections to
worldwide libraries through WorldCat, and connections to worldwide
social networking platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. The challenge,
here, is to keep up and keep ahead. Public libraries must stay familiar
with the new software and new ways to connect with users, or risk being
forgotten and ignored in favor of the latest trend online.

These new technologies do also help libraries connect with users, if the
library embraces what is available. More and more often users choose not
to come visit the library in person, but that does not need to mean that
the library cannot help them with their research needs. Reference
services are no longer limited to face-to-face interviews, with E-mail
and chat based reference becoming more accepted and sought out by users.
These "long-distance" reference encounters can be more difficult than
traditional reference questions because they are conducted at a step
removed. The librarian cannot see the patron and their body language,
and cannot hear the tone of her voice, and so cannot easily judge if the
question is being answered to the patron's satisfaction. In a survey
conducted of E-mail and chat reference patrons, Stoffel & Tucker (2004)
discovered that, for their respondents at least, both E-mail and chat
reference services were useful in different situations, and that both
were considered necessary for their patrons. They did find, though, that
standard reference procedure of leading patrons to an answer rather than
providing it directly could be a source of contention, somthing that
many patrons may become dissatisfied with in the more limited scope of
an E-mail. So, from this, another challenge is judging how best, or even
if, to answer a question fully when there is no direct feedback from the
patron about the response.

Though not related to the reference desk, one more emerging challenge
should be mentioned when discussing new technology in public libraries.
E-books are becoming an increasingly important part of any public
library's collection, and different purchasing models and publishers'
agreements have made them a moving target for anyone trying to come to
grips with their place in a library. The spread of the Kindle and Nook
has opened the doors to common recreational reading of E-books, and the
fact that many E-books remain at a comparable price to their print
editions has led some users to prefer checking out titles from the
library. Wilson (2004) has given a rundown of some of the current
difficulties, including the still-high costs of licencing, and the
question of whether, and how, to weed the collection as certain E-books
fall into disuse. For better or worse, E-books have become mainstream,
and libraries must find a way to make them a part of their collections.

Services for All Patrons
------------------------

One of the greatest challenges for any public service in the United
States is the need to serve all patrons equally and fairly, and this has
been true since these services were first put into place. Many battles
for equal service for various groups, throughout the past several
decades, have been fought and largely settled, at least legally. There
is no longer a question that all races, religions, and sexes should be
served with the same respect and ability. However, not all battles have
been completed or even entirely recognized. There are still some groups
that are usually not served equally, and have just as great a right to
such service as anyone else. The challenge here is not simply to serve
these groups equally, but to recognize when they are not being served
equally, and that this needs to be addressed.

One large group that is almost never treated with full respect and
equality are teens and young adults. Mid to late adolescence is a
significant time in a person's life, when needs and wants may be quite
different from people younger or older, but these needs are often left
unfulfilled at public libraries today. Many libraries do not have a
specific space or collection for young adults, folding in among either
the adult or the children's collections. Worse, many teens are treated
with suspicion or hostility by adults almost as a default response, even
without any provocation. Chelton (2002) describes the idea of the
"problem patron" as a teen patron who is viewed noisy and disruptive,
but is often simply being a teen. Because of this attitude toward them,
young adults often face greater restrictions and harsher penalties than
adult patrons. In order to give teens the equal service they deserve,
libraries must learn to recognize the difference between truly
disruptive behavior and normal, harmless teen behavior, and they must
embrace the differences between teens and adults while still offering
their best service to both.

If teens are thought of as too noisy and visible, another group is often
nearly invisible to libraries and miss out on services as a result.
People with developmental and learning disabilities remain left out of
many services that they would like to use at public libraries. These
disorders include Autism and Asperger's Syndrome, Attention Deficit
Disorder, Mental retardation, and several other more or less severe
disabilities. These disorders are often misunderstood by librarians, and
thus there is often little or no effort spent in serving people who live
with them. The Americans with Disabilities Act requires any public
service to provide "reasonable accommodation" for people with
disabilities, and while this is obvious and relatively easy for people
with physical disabilities, developmental disabilities often go
unrecognized and the people with them receive inadequate service as a
result. Ross & Akin (2002) took a survey of public libraries in Texas,
and discovered that many had little or no accommodations for patrons
with "invisible" disabilities. All of the libraries surveyed had few if
any services or programs for patrons with developmental disabilities,
and they had too little in the way of resources or training for their
employees to help serve these same patrons. In order to serve patrons
with developmental disabilities equally, an increasingly large part of
the total population, libraries will need to learn to recognize when
accommodations are needed, and how to implement them.

Challenges from the Environment
-------------------------------

Most of the challenges discussed so far have been related to attitude.
They are challenges because libraries and the people who work there must
change themselves, their beliefs, or improve their own abilities in
order to improve and maintain service for their patrons. Not all
challenges are like this, however. For some problems, libraries arguably
have the right attitude already, but external forces are making it more
difficult to truly serve users unhindered. Indeed, the library's
attitude or beliefs may be the very thing being challenged by those
external forces, making the library bend to their will, or take a stand
and risk being broken. With these challenges, there are often no easy
answers, and libraries often must compromise something in order to
maintain the best service they can for the greatest number of users.

The most all-consuming of these, and indeed almost certainly the
greatest challenge for every library, comes down to money. There are
never enough funds to go around, and never enough to implement all of
the services and purchase all of the materials that are wanted. Our
nation's economy remains lower than in decades past, and public services
like libraries are often some of the hardest hit. One near
contradiction, discussed by Davis (2009), is that when the economy is
weak libraries see increased usage, but have fewer resources to meet the
greater demand. More people use the library at a time like this, and
resources are stretched thinner and thinner. For most libraries, cuts
must be made (or already have been made), and alternative sources of
funding must be found to maintain the level of service that patrons have
come to expect and demand. Pearson (2009) has advice on fundraising,
pointing out that many of the most loyal donors to libraries have stayed
relatively stable in this economy, and that grassroots efforts have met
more and more success in recent years. Ultimately, every library will
need to face the situation where they have too few resources to provide
all of the services they wish to provide, and must choose what will be
left by the wayside.

Another difficulty that has long been a part of libraries, one that has
become more immediately significant in the last twelve years, is that of
user privilege and privacy. Here the problem lies not in restriction
from a lack of resources, but instead restrictions that are forced on
libraries by the law and other outside agencies. Libraries have long
held to the ideal that all information they carry should be available to
all comers, without restriction or censorship. While censorship is a
regularly fought battle, as shown by the ALA'a constantly updated list
of banned and challenged books, a more sinister problem comes when users
are unwilling to seek the information they need in the first place for
fear of who might find out they needed it. Austin (2004) explores the
question of whether or not librarians should have "privilege" in their
interactions with patrons, in the legal sense that their conversations
cannot be repeated even to the police without permission, and cannot be
compelled. Doctors and Lawyers have this protection so that their
clients can seek the information and service they need without fear of
reprisal. There is an argument to be made that librarians should have
the same protection, so that patrons can seek possibly embarrassing
information that they need without fear that it will be used against
them. This question became much more immediately relevant with the
passing of the USA PATRIOT Act, which allowed law enforcement to seek
patron records, and prevented librarians from informing their patrons of
this. Some librarians, such as Essex (2004), argue that librarians
should fight against this law and others like it, protecting their
patrons so that future patrons will also feel secure in using their
services. Again, there are no easy answers, but the questions must still
be considered and faced by libraries today.

Conclusion
----------

As stated above, the only true constant is that everything will continue
to change. In order to be successful, libraries must embrace many of
these changes while knowing when to stand against them. Libraries must
be able to adapt to constantly shifting technology, and be ready for the
next big thing to sweep by and revolutionize library service, as long as
anyone remembers that libraries are still there. Libraries must be
prepared to help every patron who comes through their doors (or browses
to their website), and be prepared to reevaluate or even abandon ideas
and prejudices that have kept them from serving everyone equally in the
past. Libraries must be able to work with fewer resources than they
think they need, and be ready to find additional funding when they find
out they are right. Libraries must able to decide which battles to
fight, and which battles cannot be won, and must instead be a source of
compromise and adaptation. Above all else, libraries must remember that
they are here to serve their patrons to the best of their ability, and
all challenges are faced so that they can improve or maintain that
service, and if this is remembered that all challenges can be met, one
way or another.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Austin, B. (2004). Should there be “privilege” in the relationship
between reference librarian and patron? *The Reference Librarian*,
*42*(87/88), 301–311.
doi:[10.1300/J120v42n87\_11](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J120v42n87_11)

Chelton, M. K. (2002). The “problem patron” public libraries created.
*The Reference Librarian*, *36*(75–76), 23–32.
doi:[10.1300/J120v36n75\_04](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J120v36n75_04)

Davis, D. M. (2009). Challenges to sustaining library technology.
*Public Libraries*, *48*(4), 12–17.

Dougherty, R. M. (2002). Planning for new library futures. *Library
Journal*, *127*(9), 38–41.

Emanuel, J. (2009). Next generation catalogs: What do they do and why
should we care? *Reference & User Services Quarterly*, *49*(2), 117–120.

Essex, D. (2004). Opposing the USA PATRIOT Act: The best alternative for
American libraries. *Public Libraries*, *43*(6), 331–340.

<span>O’Gorman</span>, J., & Trott, B. (2009). What will become of
reference in academic and public libraries? *Journal of Library
Administration*, *49*, 327–339.
doi:[10.1080/01930820902832421](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930820902832421)

Pearson, P. (2009). Fundraising, collection and advocacy in tough times.
*Public Libraries*, *48*(4), 21–23.

Ross, V., & Akin, L. (2002). Children and learning disabilities: An
E-survey of services, pprogram, resources and training. *Public Library
Quarterly*, *21*(4), 9–18.

Stoffel, B., & Tucker, T. (2004). E-mail and chat reference: Assessing
patron satisfaction. *Reference Services Review*, *32*(2), 120–140.
doi:[10.1108/00907320410537649](http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00907320410537649)

Wilson, A. P. (2004). Weeding the E-book collection. *Public Libraries*,
*43*(3), 158–159.

</div>
