---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
class: LIBR 232
csl: 'apa.csl'
date: '2013-04-03'
instructor: 'Dr. Ruphina Ozoh'
subtitle: |
    A Comparison of the Minneapolis and Roseville Libraries' Children's
    Departments
title: A Place for All Children
...

The Hennepin County Library and Ramsey County Library systems are the
two largest library systems in Minnesota. The Minneapolis central branch
and the Roseville library are the largest and busiest branch locations
of each of these library systems, respectively. For all that they are
both large, relatively close to each other and serve many of the same
patrons, these libraries are very different from each other and take
very different approaches to how they serve their communities. The
Minneapolis library is much larger, with a much higher budget, but this
is not a fair criteria to compare them. Ignoring budget differences,
though, one can see a marked difference in their attitudes and how they
serve their youngest patrons in their children's departments. Both
devote a large amount of space and resources to their children's
departments, but that does not mean they could not be improved by taking
lessons from each other. Even when looking past its greater budget, the
Minneapolis library children's department proves itself largely
superior, not because of the size of its collection, but because of how
it embraces and caters for the diversity of all its child patrons in
ways that the Roseville library does not, but could.

Children's Spaces
-----------------

The most obvious aspect of the Children's department to examine is the
space itself that holds the department. Both libraries have separate,
specific areas for children, on their main floors but kept apart from
the adult and teen collections. There are several major differences
between the two children's spaces, though, and these differences
underlie and reflect many of the differences in service for these
departments, as well. To begin with, though, I will examine the spaces
on their own, apart from the other aspects of service they affect.
Feinberg & Keller (2010) detail many aspect of designing a successful
children's area in a library, including specifics of architecture,
decoration, and overall flow. Based on their recommendations, the
Minneapolis library is the more successful. This children's department
truly feels like a unique place for children, with bright colors used
for the carpet and walls, flowing shelves with an organic layout, and
everything kept at eye level for children. In the Roseville library, on
the other hand, the children's area feels like an extension of the adult
collections, only shorter. The color scheme is unchanged, and the
shelves are in the same rigid grid, with no more visual interest than
the rest of the stacks.

The Minneapolis library also has more variety of fixturing in ways that
show acceptance of children as full patrons, much moreso than the
Roseville library. Minneapolis has several reading tables set low to the
floor for children, but still large enough to be useful for study and
group activities. Roseville only has a couple very small tables at the
back of the department, amongst the toys for the youngest children. The
Minneapolis library also has desks with computers workstations, again at
a lower height for children, and with specialized software specifically
for the library's younger patrons. The Roseville library does not appear
to trust its child patrons with dedicated computers, and younger patrons
are forced to use the same computer workstations as the rest of the
library, outside of the children's department. One of the greatest
challenges for children's services is the need to provide access to
needed services for children, as described by Peck (2006) in the later
chapters of her book. This segregation of computers shows that the
Roseville library, at least, is not providing full access for its
younger patrons, while the Minneapolis library does.

Children's Collections
----------------------

While the space of the children's department is vital, the area would be
nothing without a collection of books, DVDs, and periodicals for
children to read, watch, and use. The Minneapolis library has a larger
collection, of course, reflecting its much larger space and budget. More
importantly, however, is the way it presents that collection for its
users, proving more inclusive and accepting of all of its child patrons
than the Roseville library can manage. Peck (2006) emphasizes the need
to present a children's collection in a way that is accessible for all
children, from toddlers up the tweens, and the Minneapolis library
embraces this concept. As mentioned briefly above, the collections for
older children are treated with the same attention and respect as the
picture book collection for younger children. The chapter books are
shelved for maximum interest, with popular and recommended books called
out and displayed to make them easier to find. The shelves themselves
are arranged in patterns and loops, making it an adventure simply to
browse through them. The Roseville library appears biased toward younger
children, with far more attention paid to picture books for younger
children than to the chapter books and non-fiction for older preteens,
which are shelved in nearly the same fashion as the adult stacks.

However, this bias does lead to an advantage over Minneapolis for that
part of the collection. Roseville's picture book collection does benefit
from the extra attention, and is arrayed for much greater interest from
the youngest patrons. The picture books here have specialized shelves,
displaying the covers out and presenting a very friendly and easy to
browse appearance for the toddlers and preschoolers who will usually be
browsing these books and trying to find something fun. The Minneapolis
library does not take advantage of this opportunity. Instead, the
picture books are shelved like the rest of the children's collection, no
worse but certainly no better, with the spines facing out. While
shelving like this is fine for adults, or even older children who do not
mind reading for an interesting title or a known author, it presents an
obstacle for very young children who place much more weight on pictures
and how a book looks when deciding what to read.

One last aspect of the collection shows the more inclusive spirit shown
at the Minneapolis library. Durusau (2000) emphasizes the need for a
collection that is current and relevant for the children who use the
library. With the ever growing diversity of all populations, and in
particular the very large international community that has built up in
the Twin Cities metro area, this often means a need for non-English
collections to be relevant for all users. The Minneapolis library has a
large section for "World Languages" in its children's department,
including picture and chapter books in Spanish, Hmong, Somali, Chinese,
and many other languages. This helps demonstrate the diversity of the
world for American born children, while also providing immigrant and
visiting children with options in their native tongues. The Roseville
library has no such section. While it does have some Spanish language
items for its collection, it leaves many children in its service area
without anything in their native language to find.

Children's Programs and Activities
----------------------------------

The last area to examine is that of the special programs and activities
available for children. Storytime has long been a staple of public
libraries that have services for children, and these two libraries are
no exception. Mc<span>K</span>enzie & Stooke (2007) analyze the value of
storytime to young children in helping to build a narrative of their
world, which makes it vital for public libraries to offer this service
when possible. Both libraries offer regular story hours, and have
different versions for different age groups. While the storytime
programs are largely similar, there are interesting differences in the
way they are presented. Both libraries have a wide open space in the
main department for children to play, as well as a separate room set
aside just for younger children and activities and games, but they use
them slightly differently. The Minneapolis library conducts its story
hours and other presentations in the open area of the main children's
space, with the room set aside for play and activities that may disturb
or distract other children. The Roseville library, however, holds its
storytimes within the activity room, so that children can play or read
in the main area without being bothered. There are strengths and
weaknesses to both approaches, but again the Minneapolis library feels
more inclusive of all children with its open and accepting approach.

There are more to children's services than just storytimes, though.
Struckmeyer (2012) describes some possible activities for older
children, as well as how important it is to engage older children with
activities that will be fun and help them learn and create. In this
area, unfortunately, the Roseville library completely fails. A quick
glance at their activity calendar (Ramsey County Library, 2013) shows
that story hours are nearly the only program they run for children, and
the others are literacy and reading exercises of other sorts. The
Minneapolis library, however, shows much greater variety on their event
calendar (Hennepin Count Library, 2013), including hands-on science,
music, and art activities, giving children a chance to interact and
create. While, in part, this reflects the larger budget available to the
Minneapolis library, the Roseville library could still do more to
improve the variety of activities without greatly increasing the costs.
Cheap art and craft supplies do not cost much, and local science and
music presenters can often be persuaded to give talks for free, so this
is a major missed opportunity for the Roseville library to improve their
service for children.

Conclusion
----------

The Roseville library could improve its children's department without
greatly raising its budget by taking some cues from the Minneapolis
library. The Roseville library should make their children's department
welcoming and comfortable for children of all ages. It should recognize
that children need to use computers just as much as adult patrons, and
can be trusted to do so responsibly. When building its collection, it
should account for the fact that many patrons in its community do not
speak English as their first language, and build a collection that can
be used by all children in the neighborhood. It should also strive to
improve the variety of its programs so that more children can find
something to excite tham and hold their interest, beyond simple
storytimes for younger children. The Minneapolis library, on the other
hand, could stand to improve their presentation of some parts of their
collection, and take cues from the Roseville library on how to display
books for their youngest patrons to make the collection they have
inviting and easy to browse. With these improvements, both libraries
will have stronger children's departments that are more useful and
usable by the children in their communities.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Durusau, C. (2000). Collection development and maintenance. *Georgia
Library Quarterly*, *37*(2), 36–37.

Feinberg, S., & Keller, J. R. (2010). *Designing space for children and
teens in libraries and public places*. Chicago, IL: American Library
Association.

Hennepin Count Library. (2013). KidLinks: Upcoming events at minneapolis
central library. Retrieved from
<http://www.hclib.org/kids/events/events_results.cfm?agency=ce>

Mc<span>K</span>enzie, P. J., & Stooke, R. K. (2007). Producing
sotrytime: A collectivist analysis of work in a complex communicative
space. *Library Quarterly*, *77*(1), 3–20.

Peck, P. (2006). *Crash course in children’s services*. Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.

Ramsey County Library. (2013). Roseville library schedule of events.
Retrieved from
<http://host6.evanced.info/melsa/ramsey/eventcalendar.asp?ag=&et=&df=calendar&cn=0&private=0&ln=8>

Struckmeyer, A. M. (2012). Reaching tweens. *Children & Libraries*,
*10*(2), 36–38.

</div>
