---
class: LIBR 232
date: '02/13/2013'
title: Managing and Reference in the Roseville Library
...

<aside>

**Note** - The names of real persons contacted have been censored in
the interest of privacy.

</aside>

The Roseville public library is the largest branch of the Ramsey County
Library System, a large library system which serves northern St. Paul
and several suburbs of the Twin Cities in Minnesota. It has been rebuilt
and remodelled several times since it was first built almost fifty years
ago, and in that time the librarians who work there have often had to
change how they work so as to best help the ever-changing population of
their community. Every day they face new challenges stemming from new
technology, economic difficulties, and the changing requirements given
to them by their patrons and the library board above them. Through it
all, they do their best to help their patrons in whatever way they can.

In order to get the story of the Roseville Library, I spoke to the
library manager J--- E------ (personal correspondence, Feb. 7, 2013). Mr.
E------ has been the manager of the Roseville branch for just under a year,
but had been with the Ramsey County Public Library system for several
years before that. I also spoke to reference librarian L--- M------,
who has worked at the Roseville Library for nearly ten years (personal
correspondence, Feb 7. 2013). Both described how economic hardships and
rapidly changing technology have had a great effect their jobs in recent
years, but that they still do what they can to best serve their patrons
each day.

Mr. E------ described his typical day as largely a series of emails,
meetings, and paperwork, and that he always looks forward to Thursdays,
when he is scheduled to staff the main reference desk, as a day he can
put "management" on the back burner and work with patrons as a regular
librarian. Whether staffing the reference desk or his own office, he
ends up needing to check his email several times a day to keep up with
all of the urgent messages that come through both from the librarians
who are on his staff and the district librarians above him. He spends
far more time than he would like putting out metaphorical fires, and
wishes he could do more *acting* to improve the library than *reacting*
to problems. He also spends a great deal of time mediating between
different departments, attempting to stay fair while allocating very
tight resources where they are needed the most.

His description of his deference desk days shows a stark contrast, being
at the same time more hectic and yet more enjoyable. Ms. M------
described similar experiences in her day to day routine as one of the
regular reference librarians. They both described their days fielding
questions from patrons, most mundane and routine (such as asking where
the bathroom is and how to print something), but occasionally long a
complicated. As well, during any shift at the reference desk they would
need to take their turns with the chat and email reference service
offered by the district, and those questions were almost always of the
more complicated type. Ms. M------ said that there was nothing more
satisfying about her job than being able to help someone with a
complicated question find the right information. They were both also
clear that, in between answering questions, they were still always busy
keeping up with their own email, doing research or planning for ucoming
programs and computer classes, and reading through *Publisher's Weekly*
and *Library Journal* (among many others) to get ideas for new
acquisitions and to help answer reader's advisory questions.

Mr. E------ told me that, by far, the biggest challenge he faces as the
library manager is how to allocate scarce resources. Pacios (2007) lists
five main priorities of many public libraries, and they fall right in
line with the priorities of the Roseville library. Roseville is
dedicated to supporting the lifelong learning of its patrons, and
building a thorough and modern collection to support that learning, but
both priorities require significant contributions of staff time and
library budget. The Roseville library is a large and busy branch, and
part of a large and heavily used library system, but it is underfunded
and understaffed. Mr. E------ says that, compared to other local library
systems such as the Hennepin County Library System (which includes the
Minneapolis branch libraries), the Ramsey County libraries have a much
smaller budget and staff for the amount of circulation and usage it has.
As it is, at the Roseville library many of the full librarians are part
time, and many of them must circulate through several different
departments. He includes himself, pointing out his weekly assignment as
a reference librarian.

The Roseville library partly fills this gap through an extensive
volunteer program. Roseville has on staff about eighty volunteers, who
help with the less-skilled labor such as reshelving and labeling, as
well as staffing the used book store that is run inside of the library.
Managing volunteers, of course, presents a challenge in itself. Nicol &
Johnson (2008) describes how volunteers can take as much training, and
sometimes even require as many secondary resources, as paid staff, but
the also describe the advantages of using a workforce that is helping
because of their passion for the library and desire to help. According
to Mr. E------, while the volunteer workforce take just as much attention
to manage and maintain as regular staff, the ilbrary could not function
without them.

The staffing pinch is also being helped by the introduction of new
technology, though not without some growing pains. During a recent
remodel, overseen by Mr. E------'s predecessor Bill Michel, the library had
new RFID systems and self-checkout stations installed. Now library
patrons do not need to wait in line at the circulation desk to check out
materials, when they can do so for themselves at the automated stations.
With this in place, the library has been able to reduce the staffing of
the circulation desk to one or, at most, two staff members at a time,
with those staff members doubling as backup reference service. Of
course, with new technology comes new problems, and Ms. M------ has
found that a large number of the questions she receives are from patrons
who cannot figure out how to work the self-checkout stations, and Mr.
E------ needs to call and follow up with the library's IT provider at least
once every week or two when there are problems with the self-checkout
terminals.

In contrast with the general management problems faced by Mr. E------ every
day, the challenges faced by Ms. M------ at the reference desk (and
Mr. E------ on Thursdays) seem relatively mundane, though no less varied.
Every day brings new questions on a wide variety of topics, and some of
them are much more difficult to answer than others. True, many of the
questions are very routine, including giving help to patrons using the
library computers and simply trying to navigate the stacks and
understand the Dewey Decimal System. But she has also recently helped
patrons asking for appearances of crows and ravens in literature, asking
for books about classic Chevrolet cars with good pictures, and asking
for novels that are "like Twilight, but sexier".

One general challenge that Ms. M------ faces, aside from questions
that are difficult to answer, is balancing the desire to simply find the
answers with teaching her patrons how to find the answers for
themselves. Mr. E------ agrees, and described to me his philosophy that
librarians at the reference desk have a duty to teach their patrons how
to use library sources rather than always hand-holding them on their way
to the answer. Elmborg (2002) describes methods for teaching patrons at
the reference desk, and the need to do so. In particular, he suggests
that librarians do their patrons a *disservice* by being too quick to
answer questions without explaining how they got there, and that patrons
who understand how the searching works are more likely to continue using
the library resources for all their research needs. Ms. M------ tries
to follow this philosophy, but acknowledges the challenge when many
patrons *want* to simply be told the answer to their questions, and will
grow impatient if she describes her process in too much detail. Striking
the right balance is different for each patron, and requires her to pay
careful attention to the reaction she is getting from them.

Just as Mr. E------ has experienced as the library manager, Ms. M------
has also faced challenges relating to new technology used by the
library. Gilson (2011) describes how reference services going forward
will rely more and more on "distance" services such as chat and email,
as well as a growing reliance and web-based databases such as those
provided by EBSCO or ProQuest, and this is certainly the case at the
Roseville library. Every librarian who staffs the reference desk must
spend some of their time answering questions through chat and email via
the library's "Ask a Librarian" link on its website. After years of
learning how to answer questions face-to-face, Ms. M------ finds that
the disconnect between herself and her patrons using the distance
systems makes the questions more difficult to answer. She is used to
reading a person's body language and other cues to know if their
question is being answered to their satisfaction, as well as being able
to ask follow-up questions of her own to make sure she understands the
question correctly. Most of these supports are not available in an email
or a chat session, and she often feels like her answers will not be
enough, but has no way of knowing for sure unless the patron makes a
point of letting her know.

Ms. M------ feels that the greatest challenge she faces comes from
attempting to help teenage patrons. As mentioned, most librarians must
circulate through different departments, and Ms. M------ often finds
herself staffing the teen services desk. She has come to discover that
teens do not use reference services in the same way as adults, and she
finds the experience quite frustrating. Agosto & Hughes-Hassell (2005)
present in their study that teens, first of all, often will not go to
the library at all when seeking information, and when they do they can
be very vague with their questions. Ms. M------ would certainly agree
with this, as she describes getting teens to simply ask her a question
as "like pulling teeth", and that even when they do, they give little
indication on whether she has been able to find the information they
need. She has found that most teens want to find what they need
themselves, even if they do not know how, and often will simply give up
rather than ask the librarian. Overcoming this attitude, and then
finding out for sure what they really need, is one of the most difficult
challenges she thinks she must handle.

Mr. E------ and Ms. M------ both face constant challenges as they go
about their daily routines at their library. Mr. E------ must work with
library employees both above and below him in the hierarchy in order to
keep the library running smoothly, and Ms. M------ works with a large
variety of patrons who use the library while also trying to keep up with
all of the support tasks that make her job possible. Neither one would
ever say that their work is dull, or that they have trouble keeping
busy. As their library changes around them, they both do what they can
to keep it as useful and important as possible for the people of their
community.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Agosto, D. E., & Hughes-Hassell, S. (2005). People, places, and
questions: An investigation of the everyday life information-seeking
behaviors of urban young adults. *Library & Information Science
Research*, *27*, 141–163.

Elmborg, J. K. (2002). Teaching at the desk: Toward a reference
pedagogy. *Libraries and the Academy*, *2*(3), 455–464.
doi:[10.1353/pla.2002.0050](http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/pla.2002.0050)

Gilson, T. V. (2011). Reference services today (and tomorrow?).
*Searcher: The Magazine for Database Professionals*, 32–35.

Nicol, E. A., & Johnson, C. M. (2008). Volunteers in libraries: Program
structure, evaluation, and theoretical analysis. *Reference & User
Services Quarterly*, *48*(2), 154–163.

Pacios, A. R. (2007). The priorities of public libraries at the onset of
the third millennium. *Library Management*, *28*(6/7), 416–427.
doi:[10.1108/01435120710774549](http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120710774549)

</div>
