---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
class: LIBR 228
csl: 'apa.csl'
date: Fall 2012
title: Discussion Posts
...

Week 1 Discussion Post: Personal Librarians
-------------------------------------------

The idea of a Personal Librarian, as given by Kilzer (2011), is one that
holds strong appeal. It serves as advocacy and marketing, while at the
same time giving patrons the direct, one-on-one attention they need. The
way Kilzer describes it, with librarians contacting thousands of
students individually, would only work in an academic setting, where
lists of patrons are available and resources can be devoted to such
contacts. Even so, public libraries large and small can benefit from the
attitude of giving one-on-one service at all levels, and reaching out to
all patrons, not just those who come up to the desk asking for help. As
the author mentions, many patrons never approach the desk and never ask
questions on their own initiative, so a strategy to overcome this gap is
vital to offering the best service possible.

The personal librarian approach works best, I believe, with a tiered
reference model. Tyckoson (2011) describes such a model as having "front
line" librarians and staff who are the first people contacted by
patrons, and who can answer most simple or general questions themselves.
Only for difficult, specialized, or very involved questions would
patrons be referred to reference librarians for more in-depth work. The
personal librarian model, as I see it, would fit this model with one
major difference. The staff and librarians should not stay behind a desk
waiting to be approached, but should rather roam the floor approaching
patrons themselves.

I have seen a similar difference in service levels first hand, though in
my case it was in a retail environment rather than at a library. Just
like library patrons, customers will rarely approach a cashier if they
cannot find the merchandise they need. Much greater customer
satisfaction is found by having employees roam the sales floor,
approaching customers to ensure they are finding what they want. This
can and should be applied to reference work in the library, so that all
patrons have the opportunity to find the help they need.

Again, this can work in the largest of libraries as well as small ones.
Berry (2009) describes how a similar approach is used in the Queens
Borough Public Library, one of the largest public library systems in the
country. There, they have been removing circulation desks in favor of
self-checkout kiosks. The librarians and staff are thus freed to
circulate among their patrons, giving people individual attention that
would not be possible if they were stuck behind a desk. There are still
central information and reference desks, but patrons are not limited to
those spaces when they have a question. This model, in my opinion, gives
the most bang for the ever limited buck, and allows the greatest number
of patrons to get the answers they need.

Week 5 Discussion Post: Religious Reference
-------------------------------------------

Religious texts present a significant problem for simple searching since
nearly all primary documents are translated, sometimes from very ancient
texts. There may be many different ways to refer a book, or the parts,
places, and people within each book. Is it the *Koran* or the *Qu'ran*?
Is the mother of Moses Jochebed or Yocheved? How many 'H's are in
*Bhagavad Gita*, anyway? All of these and thousands more challenges make
any kind of search difficult, and cement the importance of not only
title authority, but also the need for alternate titles to be cross
referenced.

More generally, I feel it is important to always be sensitive to the
diverse needs of our patrons, and to always try to be aware of the
context from which queries are made. Different versions of texts, as
well as different commentaries and information about the texts, exist
for very different reasons. We must always qualify our customers so that
we can fulfill their needs without wasting time with something
completely wrong. Just most obviously there are the different versions
of the bible. Aside from differences in translation, different versions
may even have more or fewer books within them. The Catholic and Eastern
Orthodox bibles have several books that are not included in Protestant
versions, or if they are they are set aside in a separate section of
"Apocrypha". The Torah, of course, would not have the New Testament.
Similarly, Shi'a and Sunni texts would both have the Qu'ran, though
possibly different translations, but they have different hadiths.
Different Hindu faiths have different Vedas. We should not need to
become expert on all the different versions, but we must stay aware that
there *are* different versions, and should at least be able to point the
patrons of our library to the different parts of our collection and
explain the differences.

Context plays an even larger role in items and questions that go beyond
the core texts themselves. There are thousands of commentaries and
interpretations with very different purposes, and we must discover the
purpose for which our patron is searching. There is little point in
pulling apologetic works for a patron who is researching the historical
context of biblical events. A criticism of biblical theology would be
equally useless to someone researching the poetry of the Psalms.

In this, I think we must maintain a similar attitude as we would with
medical and law research. We are there to help people search, but not to
interpret what they find. Our own beliefs and opinions, no matter how
strongly held, have no place whatsoever in guiding our search strategy
or our recommendations. We should always keep our patrons' needs in mind
first, and let those needs guide our searches without comment or
criticism. Just as we would not allow a patron to preach to us, we must
not allow ourselves to preach to our patrons, even if such "preaching"
is as subtle as favoring one bible translation over another because it
is the one used in your own church.

Week 6 Discussion Post: Teaching at the Desk
--------------------------------------------

I think it is important to alays keep in mind the context and the user's
needs when deciding how to structure a reference interview, including
whether or not to make the reference interview a teaching experience.
Elmborg's (2002) essay is in particular aimed at academic librarians,
and acknowledges that these interviews are different rfom those
conducted in a public library. At any kind of library, however,
reference interviews can be used for teaching, but should not always be.
Most obviously with ready reference questions, patrons will often not
have the patience to be "taught" how to find and explore the answer when
all they want is just the answer itself, and quickly. Even with larger
and more involved interviews, we must be aware of our patrons' needs,
learning styles, and their patience. We must always negotiate the
question to be sure we are helping to answer it correctly, but while
some patrons will appreciate being in full control and learning about
the process as the search is made, others have no desire for such
control, and will me more satisfied to have the librarian "lead" the
search as long as their questions are answered in the end.

If a reference interview is about being sure the question is answered,
then libguides and similar documents or websites are about answering
those questions before they are asked. Here there is no patron to guide
the search, but the guide would be best to pretend that there is. As
well, there is little choice but to treat it as a teaching experience,
as the final question cannot be answered in the guide itself, but rather
it is a tool to lead patrons to finding the answers on their own. Ward's
(2011) ideas about using Bloom's taxonomy to guide reference interview
questions can also apply with the creation of a libguide, even though
there is no patron to ask. The taxonomy can serve first to help
structure the guide itself, with each section corresponding to a
different level, in order, so that patrons reading the guide can get the
basic benefits early on and the more in-depth as the go along through
it. As well, keeping the taxonomy in mind can help with the hypothetical
patron for whom the guide serves as the "interview." While building the
guide, we can ask ourselves questions at each level to be sure that the
guide in answering everything it needs to answer, both at a high level
so it is complete, and at a low level so that patrons can follow along.
This way the libguide can be made as useful as possible to most number
of users, by making sure all levels of questions on the topic are
covered.

Week 8 Discussion Post: Searching for Art
-----------------------------------------

The readings for this week give a decent start for researching different
types of art and commentary on them, but I think for many purposes they
do not go far enough. All of the resources given, such as those listed
by Ravas (2009), assume that users are conducting research in the
academic sense. That is, they are looking for recognized, "professional"
artists, artistic works, and commentary on the same. There is a much
wider world of artistic expression, and many users---especially those
who are not doing academic research but are simply looking for their own
enjoyment or enrichment---will not be satisfied with only the accepted
art canon.

Underground and amateur artistic work have existed as long as all art.
Even just a few decades ago, to use one well-publicised example,
Jean-Michel Basquiat becmme known as an underground graffiti artist long
before he gained any mainstream recognition (or news articles). In the
digital age, amateur and user-produced content of all sorts have
exploded. Blogs and independant news and reviews are well-known, amateur
fiction has been gaining recognition in libraries, but other artistic
forms are also huge. Ravas mentioned MySpace, which has a large number
of indie musicians as well as known professionals. DeviantArt has a
similarly large showcase of amateur visual artists, as well as a few
professionals. Video sites like Youtube and Blip have long showcased
amateur filmmakers and musicians. Some, such as the producers at
ChannelAwesome (creators of <thatguywiththeglasses.com> and
<blisteredthumbs.com> along with many affiliates) are even making a
living with their "amateur" creations.

Obviously it is impossible to be familiar with all such sites and their
content. Still, I think it is important to know *about* such sites, and
know how to find them, when trying to help our users find artistic
content beyond the accepted and recognized canon of artwork.

Week 10 Discussion Post: Phsychology Reference
----------------------------------------------

The article by Arnold, Bender, & Brown (2006) reviewing different
article databases is a valuable comparison, however as librarians we
also need to be able to guide our patrons in their use of these
databases. In particular, we must be careful about the relevance and
currency of any articles found. Like any science, especially medical
sciences, psychology is a constantly moving target. What is considered
correct today is not what was considered correct yesterday, and may not
be what is correct tomorrow. Diagnoses, criteria, whole paradigms about
particular disorders or illnesses can change rapidly, hopefully because
of new research, but often because of political whims and popular
attitudes.

This situation is even worse with the main tool used for diagnosis, the
DSM-IV-TR (as well as earlier and, soon, newer versions). The creators
of this manual are under a great deal of pressure from all sides about
the disorders they list, the specific symptoms they cite, and the
language used to describe them. These are changing all the time,
sometimes as a result of controversy, and often causing just as much
controversy. One classic example, described by Drescher (2008), is how
homosexuality was once listed as a disorder, but was removed in 1973.
More recently, one well-publicized change coming in the DSM-V, mentioned
by Ghaziuddin (2011), is that Asperger's Syndrome is to be removed as a
separate disorder, now combined with Autism in a single diagnosis with a
wider range of applications. Many people, psychologists and laypersons
alike, are skeptical of the validity of the DSM in any version, and as
librarians we must be aware of that controversy and careful about
treating it like the final word on the subject.

Week 13 Discussion Post: Changing Field of Reference
----------------------------------------------------

Reference librarianship is changing just like all kinds of work to
reflect our more digital world. As I read the article by
<span>O’Gorman</span> & Trott (2009) I saw many similarities between the
changes they saw in the library environment, and the changes that my own
place of work (a retail store) is going through. Both are seeing a
reduction of the use of "desks"---whether a reference desk or a
register---in favor of "roving" employees who can provide their services
on-the-spot wherever they go. Both or seeing a reduction of specialized
experts in favor of jacks-of-all-trades who are expected to provide
top-notch service to all clients regardless of their specific needs.
This seems like less of a change in libraries specifically, and more of
a change in the expectations of users for all services, regardless of
situation.

I think, on the whole, these are positive trends for both environments.
These changes are making both types of services more focused on the
*user* rather than on the *product*. In order to stay relevant,
libraries have to keep up with the changing needs of their patrons, and
those needs are certainly changing. The simple fact is that Google and
Wikipedia really are faster and, often, better resources for short and
simple reference questions, so it is no wonder that such questions are
disappearing. At the same time, patrons are getting used to having
near-immediate access to whatever information they need. If they cannot
find it through Google, they will still expect and demand it through us
as much as possible. It is up to us to be the experts who can find that
information, and show them how to do so themselves for the next time,
but we must always remember that we are there for them, not as keepers
of the sacred information, but as a service giving access to it.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Arnold, S. J., Bender, V. F., & Brown, S. A. (2006). A review and
comparison of psychology-related electronic resources. *Journal of
Electronic Resources in Medical Libraries*, *3*(3), 61–80.
doi:[10/1300/J383v03n03\_04](http://dx.doi.org/10/1300/J383v03n03_04)

Berry, J. N. (2009). The politics of excellence. *Library Journal*,
*134*(11), 28.

Drescher, J. (2008). A history of homosexuality and organized
psychoanalysis. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis &
Dynamic Psychiatry*, *36*(3), 443–460.
doi:[10.1521/jaap.2008.36.3.443](http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/jaap.2008.36.3.443)

Elmborg, J. K. (2002). Teaching at the desk: Toward a reference
pedagogy. *Libraries and the Academy*, *2*(3), 455–464.
doi:[10.1353/pla.2002.0050](http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/pla.2002.0050)

Ghaziuddin, M. (2011). Asperger disorder in the DSM-V: Sacrificing
utility for validity. *Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry*, *20*(2), 192–193.
doi:[10.1016/j.jaac.2010.11.013](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2010.11.013)

Kilzer, R. (2011). Reference as service, reference as place: A view of
reference in the academic library. *The Reference Librarian*, *52*(4),
291–299.
doi:[10.1080/02763877.2011.588539](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02763877.2011.588539)

<span>O’Gorman</span>, J., & Trott, B. (2009). What will become of
reference in academic and public libraries? *Journal of Library
Administration*, *49*, 327–339.
doi:[10.1080/01930820902832421](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930820902832421)

Ravas, T. (2009). Contemporary artists, composers, filmmakers, and
playwrights—show me the sources! A guide to strategies and annotated
bibliography. *PNLA Quarterly*, *73*(2), 9–13, 29.

Tyckoson, D. A. (2011). Issues and trend in the management of reference
services: A historical perspective. *Journal of Library Administration*,
*51*, 259–278.
doi:[10.1080/01930826.2011.556936](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2011.556936)

Ward, D. (2011). Expanding the reference vocabulary: A methodology for
applying Bloom’s taxonomy to increase instruction in the reference
interview. *Reference Services Review*, *39*(1), 167–180.
doi:[10.1108/00907321111108187](http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00907321111108187)

</div>
