---
class: LIBR 228
date: '11/12/12'
subtitle: 'A User-Centered Evaluation of Two LibGuides'
title: Researching Literature
...

Introduction
------------

Research guides, often called LibGuides, are often underused and
underappreciated resources offered by academic libraries. They take a
great deal of time and resources to develop, and need constant
maintenance by a subject librarian who is familiar with the ins and outs
of the particular academic field. Yet, for all this effort, they often
sit unknown by the student population, or ignored even if they are known
in favor of Google, the library catalog, or some other more (or less)
focussed method of research. Much of the research about this use (or
lack thereof) of research guides, such as that done by Hintz et al.
(2010), suggests that while a lack of knowledge about research guides is
one major reason that they do not get used, another reason is that they
often do not fit the needs or research styles of the students for whom
they are created. Lack of knowledge about research guides can be solved
by better outreach and marketing, but the second problem is much deeper.
To explore this problem, I have evaluated two such research guides
against common criteria given by students, analyzing them individually
and comparing them with each other, in order to see how current research
guides meet or fail to meet the needs of the researchers intended to use
them.

For this evaluation I chose two research guides in the field of English
Language and Literature, my own undergraduate major and the academic
field with which I am most familiar. One is the "English & American
Literature InfoGuide" created for Pepperdine University by librarian
Elizabeth Parang (<http://infoguides.pepperdine.edu/EnglishLiterature>),
and the other is the "English Language and Literature Research Guide"
created for Yale University by librarian Todd Gilman
(<http://guides.library.yale.edu/english>). Both were created using the
LibGuides software system by Springshare, so they have many superficial
similarities and, in theory, should have the same capabilities, so the
differences between them are due to the choices made when they were
created. Both are thorough and detailed, covering the large breadth of
material needed for this subject, and both connect not only to their
university's library but also to a wide variety of subscription and
external resources. The LibGuide created for Yale appears to have a
larger number of resources available, not surprising as Yale is a much
larger university with greater resources. I found, though, that this
does not guarantee a better research guide. I found, indeed, that the
guide from Pepperdine does a much better job of presenting the resources
it does have for its students and, despite a possibly smaller
collection, proves to be a much better option for conducting research in
literature. In the end, though, both guides fall short in the area of
research help, as in tutorials or software to help students learn how to
conduct research better, and that both have problems with their layouts
and appearance that may discourage students from using them.

Evaluation Criteria
-------------------

These two research guides will be evaluated based on several criteria
coming from two main approaches. First, they be analyzed for their
general usability as research guides. Hintz et al. (2010) have conducted
a survey of many students and have used this to identify a "top ten"
list of the elements most important to students when using a research
guide. Ouellette (2011) has done similar research, also identifying
aspects important to students as well as the most common weaknesses
present in research guides. Both studies found an overwhelming desire
for a simple and uncluttered layout, and both studies found a general
need for clear navigation that sensibly splits research guides in to
smaller, easier to understand pieces. Students praised research guides
that evaluated each offered resource with brief explanatory notes, and
they also appreciated guides that offered help for all aspects of
research, from finding and evaluating resources to proper citation and
formatting. They wanted research guides that went beyond simply listing
the resources available, and truly helped guide them in their research
assignments. For each of these most significant elements identified by
the research, the two chosen guides will be evaluated and compared to
discover strengths and weaknesses.

The second approach will be to evaluate the research guides from the
point of view of a student or researcher within the field of Literature,
specifically. Each research discipline is different, after all.
Ouellette (2011) makes a point that every research guide should be
tailored to the needs of the researchers within each field, as well as
the different information-seeking strategies used by those researchers.
A research guide for Law research should be different from one for
Physics research, and so on. Unfortunately, there has been little
research identifying the specific needs and strategies of Literature
students, the primary audience of these guides. Head (2008) has
conducted a survey of Humanities and Social Sciences students to
identify their typical information-seeking behavior, including where
they need extra help. An English student may not fit precisely, but
there should be enough overlap. This will be supplemented by research
conducted by Chu (1999) evaluating the research strategies of
professional literary critics who, while certainly having a different
focus, nonetheless will have many of the same needs as literary
students. Both research guides will be evaluated based on this research
to identify how well they fit the needs of the students using them.

General Usability
-----------------

A simple, clean, and uncluttered layout is the single most important
element of a research guide identified by both Hintz et al. (2010) and
Ouellette (2011). Their survey respondents preferred guides that had
fewer tabs, good use of whitespace, and clear, concise information. They
reacted negatively to guides with a large number of tabs or other
on-screen elements, feeling overwhelmed by too much information with too
little guidance. Both research guides show similar strengths and
weaknesses in this area. Gilman's (2012) LibGuide for Yale has eight
navigation tabs, with more specific topics available from drop-down
menus under each, while Parang's (2012) InfoGuide for Pepperdine has
fourteen tabs, with no drop-down menus. Neither is overwhelming, though
the Pepperdine tabs could perhaps be more concise. The Yale guide uses a
three-column layout, which does clutter the page, though the content is
always within the center column, with the outer columns usually
containing the same information on each page. The Pepperdine guide also
uses a three-column layout, but it almost always has different
information in each column, increasing the chance of overwhelming or
confusing a student with too much information at a time.

Returning to the navigation tabs, another element called out by the
research is the need for consistent and understandable navigation.
Again, there should not be too many tabs, but the ones that are there
should be easy to understand and not display library jargon that
non-librarians will not understand. They should be clear about what
resources or research tools are to be found by following them. Both
guides follow this well, though with different approaches. The
Pepperdine guide, as stated, has no drop-down menus contained in its
tabs, so it only has fourteen pages beneath the main portal. The tab
titles are brief and---except for one which is only listed as "Other
Sources"---are clear about what resources are available under each tab,
with tabs for research methods as well as literary genres. The Yale
guide does use drop-down menus, which allows for more specific topics
without cluttering up the page. Most of the tabs are for a specific time
period, and clearly show this. However, there is only a single
"Overview" tab which contains all of the typical resources for finding
articles and databases, books and archive collections, and so on. Most
users come to a research guide to search for resources, and indeed
Ouellette (2011) found that overwhelmingly students used research guides
to find the best article databases, and the Yale LibGuide makes these
resources more difficult to find by burying them within an unclear
"Overview" tab.

One last topic on the look and feel of the research guides to cover is
the seemingly trivial, but nonetheless important aspect of page length.
Hintz et al. (2010) found that students will rarely scroll a page down,
often only if absolutely necessary, and that they much prefer a page
with little or no scrolling. For websites with a large amount of
content, this would mean that the content needs to be broken down into
multiple, smaller pieces. The Pepperdine InfoGuide follows this
guideline thoroughly. While there is a small amount of scrolling needed,
simply because of the amount of space taken by the University's header,
most pages require very little scrolling, with all of the major content
visible if not complete as soon as the page has loaded. This is
accomplished by breaking the content into three columns, which has other
problems noted above, but also by keeping all of the information concise
and to the point, with nothing extra. The Yale LibGuide, however, falls
short in this matter. Even broken up into a large number of very
specific pages, each page contains a large list of resources, and many
pages are much longer than anything on the Pepperdine page. Each page
appears to list every resource available to its users, while Ouellette
(2011) found that most students only want to best resources, and
suggested that the remainder be left out of research guides in order to
keep them brief and useful.

This last point, that students want to be told the best resources
available and not simply given a list of all resources, points toward
another major area of usefulness for research guides. Many students,
especially those who are knew to research or who are most familiar with
a different subject, want to be guided by the research guide. They want
help with their research, help figuring out which resources are
worthwhile and which are not. One way to do this is to only list the
most useful resources, but that is only a start. Another method, one
that is identified by Hintz et al. (2010) as the second most desired
aspect of a research guide by the responding students, is to have
annotations describing each resource. These annotations should be brief,
but still convey what each resource is used for and, for similar
resources, which would be more appropriate to use in different
circumstances. Parang's (2012) InfoGuide is an excellent example of a
research guide that does precisely this. Nearly every resource on each
page has a sentence or two describing that resources strengths and
unique properties. The descriptions are clear and concise, and state
precisely how well each resource covers its subject area. Gilman's
(2012) LibGuide does not cover nearly as much of its collection. A
couple pages, such as those listing Articles & Indexes and General
Reference, have full annotations for most of the listed resources. Most
of the remaining pages, including all of the time period and genre
pages, only list resources with no description. A student trying to
research through these pages would need to know ahead of time what they
needed.

Many students also want additional help for conducting their research,
beyond descriptions of the resources available. These research guides
are often aimed at new students who are not yet familiar with academic
research, and they appreciate guides on how to research, how to find and
evaluate resources, and how to properly credit those resources in their
assignments. The Pepperdine InfoGuide includes brief pages on how to
perform basic searching, how to find books and articles related to the
topic being researched, and how to use that research properly without
plagiarising other authors. This also includes links to other guides on
searching the university's OPAC and to the most commonly used citation
styles. The Yale LibGuide does not include as much information for
beginners. There are brief mentions of how to find items in the
university library and that the journal index can be used for finding
useful articles, but the guide as a whole appears to assume that anyone
using it already knows how to perform academic research and how to use
their resources properly. One of the navigation tabs does link to a
course-specific guide that has more basic information and research,
though this is still missing any information on citation. This link
gives no indication that the information found inside would be useful
for beginning researches, and would likely not be followed or found by
anyone who is not already enrolled in that specific course. Everyone
else is left to their own devices for researching, and using that
research, correctly.

Usability Within the Discipline
-------------------------------

English language and literature is a field that has several unusual or
unique needs when compared to other disciplines, and any research guide
that aims to cater for this subject must address these needs. The
largest difference, of course, is the content itself, the original
literature as well as the criticism and analysis of these writings. As
Chu (1999) points out, researchers of literature have an incredibly
large corpus of material to draw upon, including primary material going
back to medieval times, and a history of criticism that, while not as
far reaching, still goes back several centuries. Aside from the length
of time, there is also the breadth of genre to keep in mind, including
many different forms and styles from epic poetry to comic plays.
Literary research also places a much greater emphasis on primary sources
than most other fields of study. The main focus of English Literature is
not on "original" research like the physical or social sciences, but
rather begins with simply reading and analyzing a work of literature,
and following that with other analyses from other authors. Both research
guides address this enormous variety of necessary content, though they
approach it from different angles. Gilman's (2012) LibGuide for Yale
divides the subject space by time and by place. Each selection in the
tab menu covers an era, with medieval writings separated from the
Renaissance, which is in turn separated from modern works. Some of these
are still further divided by place, with Caribbean literature
differentiated from African literature, and there are also a couple
special subjects such as children's literature and popular genre
fiction. Parang's (2012) InfoGuide for Pepperdine also divides the
subject area, but this time by broader topics. She has separate tabs for
English and American literature, a special subject for Poetry, and also
includes a path for finding Primary sources separately from secondary
sources and criticism.

Students who research literature often have a great need for help in
navigating this enormous amount of material that their field
encompasses. Head (2008) found that most students in the Humanities have
very broad guidelines about allowable research subjects, and often have
difficulty taking their broad research topics and narrowing down to
specific subjects for their assignments. They feel overwhelmed by the
large amount of information available, and wish for guidance in how to
decide on a topic and how to evaluate the resources they find. Chu
(1999) also discusses how literary research builds on the large
established knowledge base, and that in the area of literature, research
does not mean to test an idea like in many other disciplines, but rather
it often means reading until an idea is found in the first place. This
is one area in which neither of the analyzed research guides offer much
help. They both offer a large number of resources for any literary topic
a student might which to pursue, but neither one offers any help in
evaluating that topic or deciding how to narrow it down. This is,
perhaps, to large an undertaking for any one research guide to tackle,
but nonetheless it is one that is needed in the subject. The research
guides obviously should not do too much hand-holding, and cannot decide
on research topics for the students, but they would become much more
valuable for a large number of students if they were to include a
section that helped them find and decide upon topics for themselves.

Conclusion
----------

The LibGuide from Yale, despite its large number of resources and
extensive breadth of coverage, has proven itself to be difficult and
offputting to use. The layout is too cluttered and, on most pages, too
long. The navigation tabs are too confusing, with the most useful pages
buried behind unintuitive links that give little indication what can be
found behind them. The guide as a whole simply assumes too much of its
students, listing hundreds of resources but not guiding them in their
use. The InfoGuide from Pepperdine is much more useful, from a
user-perspective. Each page is a comfortable size. The navigation is
simple and clear, for the most part. Best of all, each resource is
annotated and explained, with the quality of resources given priority
over sheer quantity of resources. Even so, this InfoGuide is not
perfect. Several of the pages remain quite cluttered with a hodge-podge
of loosely related information, and some of the subject pages are, while
brief, also too broad, making it difficult to find the right
information. This guide could also be much stronger in helping its
students with their research, as many students are not familiar with the
subject and do not know where to begin. Pepperdine's Literature
InfoGuide is good, but it could be great.

If these two research guides are representative of the current state of
research guides as a whole, then there remains a great deal of room for
improvement. Simply listing relevant resources for a subject area can be
useful, and indeed is the main way that most students currently use
research guides, but it is not truly guiding students in their research.
Many students, especially beginners and those from other academic
fields, need more in a research guide than is usually offered. A
research guide could, and I would say should, offer help for students at
all levels and at all points of their research, from helping to choose a
relevant but specific enough topic, to the final citation formatting of
their papers. Research guides need to take web usability standards into
account, creating a space that is welcoming and pleasing, not just
functional. Most importantly, research guides need to be tailored to
their specific subject, and not try a one-size-fits-all approach to
their functionality. To do that, though, there needs to be research on
what the specific needs of each discipline really are, and how
information is best found within that discipline. With these guiding
principles kept in mind when creating and updating research guides,
there will be no bar to any student using them as they are meant to be
used.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Chu, C. M. (1999). Literary critics at work and their information needs:
A research-phases model. *Library and Information Science Research*,
*21*(2), 247–273.
doi:[10.1016/S0740-8188(99)00002-X](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0740-8188(99)00002-X)

Gilman, T. (2012). English language and literature research guide. *Yale
University Library*. Retrieved from
<http://guides.library.yale.edu/english>

Head, A. J. (2008). Information literacy from the trenches: How do
humanities and social science majors conduct academic research? *College
& Research Libraries*, *69*(5), 427–445.

Hintz, K., Farrar, P., Eshghi, S., Sobol, B., Naslund, J.-A., Lee, T.,
Stephens, T., et al. (2010). Letting students take the lead: A
user-centered approach to evaluating subject guides. *Evidence Based
Library and Information Practice*, *5*(4), 39–52.

Ouellette, D. (2011). Subject guides in academic libraries: A
user-centered study of uses and perceptions. *Canadian Journal of
Information and Library Science*, *35*(4), 436–451.

Parang, E. (2012). English & American literature. *Infoguides at
Pepperdine University*. Retrieved from
<http://infoguides.pepperdine.edu/EnglishLiterature>

</div>
