---
title: William Shakespeare
subtitle: A libGuide
class: LIBR 228
date: 2012-12-11
...

<aside>

This LibGuide was created in December of 2012 by Jason Seeley. It was a
class project for LIBR 228 - Advanced Reference Services at San Jose
State University. The original is (at the time of this writing) still
available at <http://libraryschool.campusguides.com/shakespeare>. The
content of the LibGuide is reproduced below for this portfolio.

</aside>

Description
-----------

All about researching and writing about William Shakespeare, his works,
and the context in which he wrote. This research guide is intended for
students new to Shakespeare who need an idea of where to start.

Tags
:   16th century literature
    17th century literature
    english literature
    literary criticism
    literature
    shakespeare


Guide Index
-----------

-   [Home](#home)
-   [Shakespeare's Works](#shakespeares-works)
-   [Shakespeare in Context](#shakespeare-in-context)
-   [Analysis and Criticism](#analysis-and-criticism)


##Home        {#home}


<div class="libguide-fun">

###Just For Fun

Every page of this guide will have a sidebar like this one, giving a
resource that is “Just for Fun,” but may still be useful or interesting
for the beginning Shakespeare scholar.

-   Things I will not do when I direct a Shakespeare Production
    <http://angevin2.livejournal.com/148520.html>
    Anyone who has acted, directed, or even simply seen more than a
    couple productions of Shakespeare plays will have horror stories of
    decisions that truly should not have been made. Here is a selection
    of some of the funniest mishaps or mistakes that have occurred while
    putting on a play.

</div>


###Welcome to the William Shakespeare LibGuide

Welcome everyone to this beginner’s introduction to researching William
Shakespeare and his works. This research guide has been created for
anyone who is new to the Bard and needs to know where to start.

This guide does not go into great depth, nor does it try to list every
possible resource that could be used. Instead, it lists many of the most
useful resources that are available on the broad topic of Shakespeare
and his works, along with a few pointers for how to continue your
research when you need to go beyond what is listed here.

This guide is intended for students who may have done literary or
scholarly research in the past, but have never needed to approach
Shakespeare before. It should be appropriate for High School or early
college students, or anyone who simply wishes to gain a better
understanding of Shakespeare.


###How to use this guide

This guide is not intended to be read front-to-back. Rather, it has
resources arranged in a few broad categories based on which aspect of
Shakespeare research you are most interested in.

Many of the best resources available on or by William Shakespeare are in
print as books. In this research guide, any books list will have a link
to WorldCat to allow you to find them at your local library.

If you do not know where to start, I think it is always best to begin
with the works themselves. The **Shakespeare’s Works** tab will lead you
to the plays and poems written by William Shakespeare. This includes the
text of the plays themselves, as well as links and pointers to good
videos editions of the plays.

Once you have read or seen the play you are interested in, then it is
time to find out more of the world surrounding the play so you can
understand it better. **Shakespeare in Context** Includes resources on
William Shakespeare’s life and his world, so you can understand his
writing in the context in which it was written. It also includes
resources on Shakespeare’s language, so that you can better understand
the text itself.

After that, there is also the centuries of writing *about* Shakespeare
that has come since. **Analysis and Criticism** gives direction on
finding the resources that try to explain the writings themselves. It is
a portal to get you started reading the immense amount of scholarship
that has already been done on Shakespeare’s works, helping you find and
focus on the resources that you need.

Be sure to check out the “Just for Fun” resource on each page, for when
you need a break from all the stuffy scholarship.


Shakespeare's Works      {#shakespeares-works}
-------------------

<div class="libguide-fun">

###Just for Fun

-   The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged) by The Reduced
    Shakespeare Company\\
    Publication Date: 2002\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/complete-works-of-william-shakespeare-abridged/oclc/52399617>
    
    So you say you don’t have time to read all those long plays? Well I
    have good news for you! The Reduced Shakespeare Company have taken
    the essence of all 37 of the Bard’s plays and distilled them down
    into one 90 minute presentation. Just as good as the real thing in
    only a fraction of the time!
    
    Kidding aside, this play is hilarious for Shakespeare scholars and
    new fans alike.


</div>

###The Play's the Thing...

For any research or writing about Shakespeare, you of course have to
start with the text itself. Fortunately, there is no shortage of ways to
find and read the plays and poetry, as it is all public domain and
readily available.

For casual reading, there is nothing wrong with a simple copy like you
can find in the bargain bin at the local bookstore, or on any of several
websites around the internet. For serious research, though, a good
critical edition is vital. These editions, such as the *Riverside
Shakespeare*, the *Arden Shakespeare*, or the *Bedford Shakespeare*,
include very useful notes and annotations to help understand and
appreciate the text more fully.

-   Open Source Shakespeare\\
    <http://www.opensourceshakespeare.org/>This online site includes the
    full text of all of Shakespeare's plays and poems. This version is
    especially useful because it has the complete works fully indexed
    and searchable, making it easy to find a particular line, or all the
    lines spoken by a particular character.

-   The Arden Shakespeare\\
    ISBN: 1408143550\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/search?q=Arden+Shakespeare>*The
    Arden Shakespeare* is by far one of the best critical editions od
    Shakespeare’s plays available. Whether using the single volume
    complete works, or single title editions, every volume comes
    complete with critical essays and history, thorough and detailed
    footnotes, and copies of the sources Shakespeare used while writing
    the plays. If you only ever read one edition of Shakespeare’s works,
    this is the one you should choose.


###Finding in the Catalog

Here are some suggestions for find the works of Shakespeare in your
local library.

#### Call Numbers

First, find out if your library uses Library of Congress classification
or Dewey Decimal Classification. Then, especially if you are using a
large university library, find out if the Humanities or Literature
collections are in a specific branch or floor.

Once you are in the right place, the Shakespeare works should be in
these call number ranges:

-   Library of Congress: **PR2750-2875**
-   Dewey: **822.33**

#### Catalog Searching

To find all the works of Shakespeare in the library catalog, search for
"Shakespeare, William" as the **Author**. If you search for Shakespeare
under **Subject**, or just under **Keyword**, you will also pull up all
materials *about* Shakespeare, which will be a very long list.


###Shakespeare on Screen

It is important to remember that Shakespeare’s plays are *plays*. They
are meant to be seen and heard, not read. It is not always possible to
get to the theatre to watch a performance live—though that is always the
best—but there are several excellent plays on video and film
adaptations. I highly recommend any plays produced by the Royal
Shakespeare Company, and any films directed by Kenneth Branagh.

-   *Twelfth Night* by Trevor Nunn\\
    Publication Date: 1996\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/twelfth-night/oclc/427413551>This
    beautiful version of Shakespeare’s best comedy plays well with the
    gender stereotypes and confusion that abounds in most of his
    comedies. It is also very funny, and makes it easy to understand the
    language.

-   *Hamlet* by Kenneth Branagh\\
    Publication Date: 1996\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/hamlet/oclc/137242345>Easily one of,
    if not the best version of *Hamlet* ever put to film. This has an
    all-star cast, keeps everything moving quickly, and includes many
    visual touches to help explain what is going on whenever the text
    gets confusing. Make sure you have a good chunk of time set aside,
    though; this film is four hours long, but it is never boring.

-   *Richard III* by Richard Loncraine\\
    Publication Date: 1995\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/richard-iii/oclc/163199563>Sir Ian
    McKellen stars as the unrepentant villain in this film which updates
    the play to the 1930s, using the modern setting to help explain the
    complex relationships between the characters that can easily be
    missed by readers who are not familiar with English History.


###Watch Hamlet

Watch *Hamlet* right now on your computer. This production by the Royal
Shakespeare Company stars David "Doctor Who" Tennant as the melancholy
prince, and Patrick Stewart as the villain Claudius.

<aside><p>No longer available.</p></aside>


Shakespeare in Context     {#shakespeare-in-context}
----------------------

<div class="libguide-fun">

###Just for Fun

-   *Shakespeare in Love* by John Madden\\
    ISBN: 0788818937\\
    Publication Date: 1998\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/shakespeare-in-love/oclc/43266814>

    This film is completely fiction, of course, but screenwriter Tom Stoppard
    and director John Madden put a great deal of research into making
    this as authentic as possible. While the story shown never happened,
    it nonetheless gives a very good impression of what life would have
    been like for the young Shakespeare in 1590s London.

</div>


###Shakespeare's Life

Shakespeare did not write in a vacuum. There is much to know about his
life and world in order to understand his writings, and we can only
scratch the surface here.

Besides the documents included in these resources, also try searching
for history works of the time period, and for other authors and
playwrights from the same era.

-   *The Arden Shakespeare Miscellany* by Jane Armstrong\\
    ISBN: 1408129108\\
    Publication Date: 2011-04-01\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/arden-shakespeare-miscellany/oclc/753160930>
    
    This collection from the *Arden* line of Shakespeare texts includes a
    great deal of information about Elizabethan England, the theatres
    and plays of the time, the society and history surrounding them, and
    many other subjects to help put Shakespeare fully in context with
    his world.

-   *William Shakespeare: A Compact Documentary Life* by Samuel
    Schoenbaum\\
    ISBN: 0195051610\\
    Publication Date: 1987-05-14\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/william-shakespeare-a-compact-documentary-life/oclc/2887377>
    
    This classic work collects together as many documents as possible from
    Shakespeare's life, including nearly every written mention of him
    that has been found. It uses these fragments and other related to
    them to reconstruct as much as possible about Shakespeare's life
    without dipping too much into baseless speculation or fiction that a
    narrative biography must do.


###Shakespeare's Language

One of the most difficult aspects of reading and understanding
Shakespeare is his language. Shakespeare wrote in Early Modern English,
a language that is nearly the same as what we use today, but at the same
time very different in many ways. Aside from words that are rarely used
anymore and words that have changed meaning, Shakespeare was also a poet
who included a great deal of metaphor and allusion in his writing.

For any beginner to Shakespeare it is vital to have a well-annotated
edition of the text that explains these changes in language and
references.

-   *The Language of Shakespeare* by The Shakespeare Resource Center\\
    <http://www.bardweb.net/language.html>
    
    This website is a great
    resource for anyone who finds themselves scratching their head and
    asking what Shakespeare is trying to say. It is a portal with links
    to introductions to Elizabethan grammar, dictionaries of changed or
    lost words, and explanations of pronunciation and puns. With this
    reference, you will finally know what a bodkin is!

-   *Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare* by Isaac Asimov\\
    ISBN: 0517268256\\
    Publication Date: 2003-09-02\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/asimovs-guide-to-shakespeare/oclc/4498736>
    
    This hefty tome by Isaac Asimov is a thorough explanation of the context,
    references, and allusions in Shakespeare’s plays. Dr. Asimov goes
    through each play systematically and explains the historical and
    geographic context of each play (so you can learn where Bohemia is,
    or when *Hamlet* is supposed to have happened). He also goes through
    each reference or allusion to history or mythology and explains
    them, so that Shakespeare’s drawn out metaphors will finally make
    sense.
    
-   *The Oxford English Dictionary*\\
    <http://www.oed.com/>
    
    Absolutely the most accepted authority on the
    meaning and history of every word in the English language. If you
    find a word you cannot understand, this will explain it in
    exhaustive detail, including every meaning it has ever had and the
    history behind its usage. An interesting note is that the OED
    credits Shakespeare as the inventor (or at least the first person to
    use in print) nearly 3,000 words, many of them now in common usage
    today. Note that the OED Online is by subscription, you must access
    it through your library or find a copy nearby.


###Searching in the Catalog

Here are a few pointers for finding books about Shakespeare himself and
the time he lived in.

#### Call Numbers

Shakespeare's life and biography:

-   Library of Congress: **PR2900-2936**
-   Dewey: **822.33**

Elizabethan England:

-   Library of Congress: **DA350-360**
-   Dewey: **942.05-06**

#### Subject Searching

Use your library catalog's search or subject browse. Use keywords to
narrow the search with "Shakespeare" (of course) AND "biography" or
"history".


###Period Music

Want to know what it *sounded* like in Elizabethan England? Here is a
playlist of period music from the time. If Shakespeare had an iPod, this
is what he would have had on shuffle.

<aside><p>No longer available</p></aside>


Analysis and Criticism    {#analysis-and-criticism}
----------------------

<div class="libguide-fub">

###Just for Fun

-   Shakespearen Insults\\
    <http://www.shakespeare-online.com/quotes/shakespeareinsults.html>
    
    Have you ever needed to insult someone but still be refined about
    it? Look no further than Shakespeare for all your high-class insult
    needs. Now you can call someone a “scurvy fellow” or a “swaggering
    rascal” and be sure of the literary pedigree. Just don’t be too
    surprised if you are knocked about the pate in response.


</div>


###Critical Essays

For serious Shakespeare scholarship, it is not enough to simply read the
plays. People have written about Shakespeare and his works for
centuries, and any new scholarship will be expected to draw on that
foundation. It would be impossible to list all of the many resources of
analysis and criticism that exist, but here are few good resources to
get you started.

-   Critical Essays Series\\
    ISBN: 0815338937\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/search?q=Shakespeare+criticism>
    
    This series of volumes includes a collection of essays on various topics,
    one volume for each play and volumes for the sonnets and poems. When
    just starting to dive into the critical background, these volumes
    are an excellent introduction to the literary theories analyses that
    currently hold sway.


###Literary Databases

When researching something specific, the most common resource will be
the article databases that are made available by your library. These
allow you to search for articles and essays going back decades, and many
of them include the full text so you do not need to go searching for a
hard copy of the journal in which they were originally published.

These databases are usually only available by subscription. Check with
your library to find out which ones they subscribes to, and therefor
which ones you can access. The databases listed below are examples of
common and useful databases for Shakespeare scholarship.

Take the time to learn the options available in the databases when
searching. Use the advanced search functions to help narrow down the
hits retrieved to something manageable. In particular, be sure to search
for *specific* topics (such as the play being discussed, the literary
theory/approach being used, particular characters or themes) and not
just for “Shakespeare”, or you will find yourself with tens of thousands
of articles and nothing to distinguish them.

-   Humanities Full Text (EBSCOHost)\\
    <http://vnweb.hwwilsonweb.com/hww/advancedsearch/advanced_search.jhtml;hwwilsonid=1NBSXCGH0YQFFQA3DIOSFGGADUNGIIV0?prod=HUMFT>
    
    This database includes the full text of hundreds of literary
    journals, and has intuitive search functionality making it easier to
    find what you need.
    
-   MLA International Bibliography\\
    <http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?authtype=ip,uid&profile=ehost&defaultdb=mzh>
    
    This index from the Modern Language Association is recognized as the
    most complete index of literary criticism, and the online edition
    goes back decades. Watch out, though, as it does not include full
    text, so any sources discovered will still need to be found by other
    means.
    
-   Shakespeare Collection (GALE)\\
    <http://shakespeare.galegroup.com/shax/start.do?prodId=SHAX&userGroupName=csusj>
    
    This database not inly includes a large collection of searchable
    essays and critiques, but it also has the complete text of the
    *Arden Shakespeare*, including footnotes and explanations.


###Searching in the Catalog

Here are a few pointers for finding books of analysis and critique of
Shakespeare's works.

#### Call Numbers

Shakespeare criticism:

-   Library of Congress: **PR2885-3088**
-   Dewey: **822.33**


#### Subject Searching

Use your library catalog's search or subject browse. Use keywords to
narrow the search with "Shakespeare" (of course) AND "criticism" or
"analysis" or "themes". Also search for specific literary theories such
as "feminist theory" or "colonialism".

###If You Just Use One...

-   *Shakespeare: Invention of the Human* by Harold Bloom\\
    ISBN: 1573221201\\
    Publication Date: 1998-10-26\\
    <http://www.worldcat.org/title/shakespeare-the-invention-of-the-human/oclc/39002855>
    
    Harold Bloom is professor of English at Yale University and has long been
    recognized as one of the foremost scholars on William Shakespeare.
    In this major work he analyzes the themes and, most particularly,
    the characters in each of Shakespeare's plays. This volume is widely
    considered one of the most important works of Shakespeare analysis
    in the last few decades.

