---
title: Building a Strong Team
subtitle: A Philosophy of Management
inst: Robert Boyd
date: Fall 2011
class: LIBR 204
abstract: |
    In my philosophy of management, true leadership depends on your ability
    to lead a great team. You must be able to recognize the skills needed
    when hiring, you must be able to get everyone getting along, and above
    all you must respect your team. If you respect your team, you can learn
    to understand them, and then to motivate them, so that they will do the
    best job they can as part of your team.
...

As I reflect on the many lessons I have been through, both in class and
in real life, I cannot help but feel that management cannot happen in a
vaccuum. There are certainly many important skills that every manager
must learn, and several more that are important specifically for someone
in a leadership role within a library. A leader must be able to plan
ahead, and be able to follow through on those plans. However, it has
been said that plans never last past the first battle. So, since life
can and will always be unpredictable, a good leader must also be
adaptable, able to change plans at a moments if necessary. A leader must
know his or her own organization, must know what will be required going
forward. A leader must be able to read the trends around the
organization, to predict what may happen soon, and what will affect the
organization. And, of course, a manager must be able to deal with money
and budgets. All of these are useful skills, necessary skills, but in my
opinion, they are not in and of themselves management. I believe that
true management, and great leadership, only exists when one is leading
or managing a team to success.

The first part of leading a great team, though usually not the first
skill learned, if the hiring of a great team. Nord (2011) has great
advice for how to find the right people, and make sure they are right
before putting them on the payroll. As with so many things, the only way
to see for sure is to see them in action. She suggests, and I have seen
it in action in my own experiences as a retail supervisor, putting the
new hire into the role right away, during the interview. See how she
acts and reacts when put in the same situation she will have to deal
with every day as an employee. When you see how they react under a
little bit of pressure, you can see how they will react during the real
thing.

Of course, non-profit organizations and libraries present a unique
challenge not present in most workforces. Often, a large part if not the
majority of the staff is volunteer. They are there not for a paycheck,
but because they want to be there doing what they do. Volunteers can be
a blessing, or they can be a curse, often both at the same time, and
must be handled with care. Nicol and Johnson (2008) offer some of the
pros and cons of a volunteer staff, including the possibility that they
make take more time and effort to train, but that they may also bring
fresh ideas to the table. Still, volunteers will be a part of the same
team, and should be treated with the same respect.

As, indeed, all employees and staff should be treated with respect. All
people are different, and there is no better way to get an employee to
ignore you than to act like you do not care about him. In order to
successfully lead a team, you must understand that team, and all of its
individuals. As Evans and Ward (2007) point out in their chapter on
motivation, you must know each person on the team, know how to talk with
them, know what motivates them. Often even a problem employee can become
a valued asset if you only take the time to know them. Perhaps a
teenager seems to chatter all the time rather than shelving books; than
maybe she would do better working in a children's program, chattering
with the kids while she helped them with a project. Perhaps an older
gentleman cannot keep up with the reference desk or the patrons who need
help with a computer; maybe he would love to push the book trolly around
bringing the books back where they belong. Perhaps another person likes
his routine and cannot seem to work when the kids interrupt him; maybe
he would be more confortable in a quiet office mending books and making
them just right.

All it takes is understanding what makes people tick, in order to get
them to tick the right way. Understanding means listening, and that
means respect for all the people, volunteer or paid, who work for you.
If you do not respect your employees, they certainly will not respect
you, and then all the management skills in the world will not be able to
keep your organization going.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Evans, G. E., & Ward, P. L. (2007). *Management basics for information
professionals.* 2nd ed. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman Publishers.

Nicol, E. A., & Johnson, C. M. (2008). Volunteers in libraries.
*References & user services quarterly, 48*(2), 154-163.

Nord, L. L. (2011). How to hire delightful employees. *Public libraries,
50*(4), 40-43.

</div>
