---
title: P------ Middle School Library Strategic Plan (Part One)
class: LIBR 203
date: Fall 2011
authors:
    - N------ B------
    - A------ B------
    - P------ D------
    - K------ H------
    - V------ J------
    - Jason Seeley

abstract: |
    This report is the first of two parts comprising a strategic plan for
    the P------ Middle School Library Media Center. The authors have
    conducted a literature review for the creation of a mission, vision, and
    values statement for a school library, including information on the
    necessity of these statements, and suggestions for what they should
    contain in today's changing environment. This is followed by a proposed
    mission, vision, and values statement for the media center based on this
    research. The proposed statements are informed by a detailed
    environmental scan for the media center, including analysis of
    demographics and funding, as well as an analysis of the media center's
    strength, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. These resources when
    combined provide P------ Middle School Library Media Center with the
    necessary tools to implement a strategic plan.
...

<aside>

This report was created as a group project. All names of group members,
as well as identifying references to the Middle School involved, have
been censored in the interest of privacy.

</aside>

The P------ Middle School Library Media Center is located at P------
Middle School, part of the W--- C------ School District
(WCSD). The school serves students from E------, K------,
R------, and E------, California. Even though it is a small
library, it faces many of the same challenges of larger school and
public libraries, as well as some unique to its own situation. The media
center faces budget challenges, threats from competing schools, and
difficulties stemming from working out of a temporary structure that is
not large enough for its collection and students. At the same time, it
is under pressure to perform as part of a larger school district with
broader challenges. W--- C------ School District has a
district library department strategic plan, and district goals and
objectives. However, every school is unique, with some needs that are
specific to the school. This strategic plan is being developed to
respond to the particular needs and situation of the P------ Middle
School Library. In the plan, the terms “media center” and “library” will
be used interchangeably to refer to the P------ Middle School Library
Media Center.

##Literature Review

A central part of any strategic plan is the organization's expression of
its mission, vision, and values. These statements allow an organization
to say concisely what its members find most important, both current and
future. Much of the available literature is focused on on mission
statement development, yet the vision and value statements are equally
important in giving a complete picture of an organization’s development
plan. There is a great deal of confusion about the differences between
these three statements. Often some parts are emphasized while the rest
gets left behind. There seems to be differing opinions among authors as
to what is important to include in these statements, as well as what
they see as the most important trends in the coming years, each library
is unique and needs to craft its own mission, vision, and values
statements to reflect the environment in which it must function.

##Definition of Mission, Vision, and Values Statements

An understanding of these statements is essential for the formation of
an effective strategic plan. While these statements differ, the
significance of clearly defining each value is equally important.
According to Allison, Kaye, & Jude (2005), a successful mission
statement should combine these terms to define the organization using
the who, what, and why, as well as identifying future goals. The vision
statement should identify and define the goals of the organization and
provide a roadmap for future growth. A values statement should provide
an accurate representation of the core beliefs and organizational
culture. When crafting these three statements, it is essential to
consult the current industry research and assess mission statements of
similarly structured organizations (Allison, Kaye, & Jude, 2005).

Fugazzotto states in *Mission Statements, Physical Space, and Strategy
in Higher Education* (2009) that mission statements should identify the
daily operations of an organization in both physical space and strategy.
The author notes that mission statements can frequently be abstract and
have little practical application, resulting in unsuccessful
organizational outcomes.

This problem can be overcome by crafting a practical mission statement
that takes into consideration the current organizational structure and
culture. Hartzell (2002) stresses that both mission and vision
statements are necessary, as they fulfill different needs. A mission
statement focuses on current needs and actions, what can be done now and
what is worthwhile right now. A vision statement, on the other hand, “is
a guiding philosophy” that defines “the core values and beliefs that
drive the organization” (p. 37). Fugazzotto states that a mission
statement’s ultimate goal is to “give purpose, form a strategic plan,
and define the organization’s structure” (2009). Hartzell (2002) adds
that the vision statement will remain relevant for years or even decades
to come, as long as the library still holds to those beliefs. Everything
that a library does is supposed to be informed by these statements, both
attempting to accomplish the mission and striving toward the vision. It
is vital for organizations, including individual libraries, to develop
their own mission and vision statements to reflect their own unique
position, so that they are not limited by the statements of a larger
organization. Fugazzotto concludes by saying that an effective mission
statement will produce an effective strategy and ultimately lead to a
successful organization (2009).

The American Libraries Biannual Report (2000) describes how a strongly
debated core values statement was discussed during an American Libraries
Association (ALA) council meeting. Libraries tend to follow guidelines
established by the ALA, but sometimes the ALA is unable to agree on its
guidelines. The ALA council established a task force for its core values
statement. A values statement is commonly found in the strategic plans
of business and industry. In an attempt to be seen as “professional,”
like their for-profit counterparts, non-profit organizations have
adopted similar language. Tremendous worth is placed on having a values
statement, as the task force chair Donald Sager stated, “Without common
values we are not a profession” (American Libraries, p. 81, 2000).
According to the chair the goal of the core values statement is to guide
library professionals in their work and decision-making. The task force
had difficulty arriving at a consensus for a set of value statements.
The language of business continued in the article as one of the ALA
councilors, James Casey stated that the goal of the council was to reach
the “global community” (American Libraries, 2000, p. 81). The task force
had drafted a document that was met with resistance and in the end it
was decided that existing policy and the core values statement be
revisited at another time. This conflict illustrates both the challenge
and the necessity of identifying the core values that guide an
organization’s work.

##Creation of Mission, Vision, and Values Statements

As previously stated, utilizing current research and professional
development tools are essential for the creation of a successful
statement. Allison and Kaye (2005) have created a practical guide
workbook to assist in the planning process. This particular book is
applicable to the library field because it is developed with the
non-profit structure in mind. Libraries should not look to profit-based
entities for guidance, as the corporate model is drastically different
from the library operational model. In the chapter detailing the
creation of mission, vision, and value statements, the authors describe
the mission statement as the organization’s primary current methods for
achieving its goals, the vision statement as an image of the future
toward which it is working, and the values as the beliefs and principles
used to guide the organization’s work. Allison and Kaye (2005) recommend
creating a purpose statement, a single sentence that can clarify the
organization’s goals, and to keep all three statements on focused on
this topic. One suggestion given is to employ a strategic planning
method that will assess the effectiveness of the statements by exploring
their effectiveness in hostile and financially constrained environments
(p. 2). Allison and Kaye (2005) explain that exploring the
organizational strengths and weaknesses, as well as possible outcomes,
can aid in identifying dangers and pitfalls. This method of testing
weaknesses within the organization can result in a stronger set of
statements to guide planning process.

Wallace (2009) suggests a different approach to the creation of strong
mission statements. Drawing from her own experiences, she proposes
creating the library mission statement from a marketing point of view.
In contrast to the suggestions of Allison and Kaye (2005), Wallace
(2009) suggests that libraries can learn from the corporate world’s
missions by identifying successfully tested information. Mission
statements should be visible, easily accessible, and able to be used as
planning guides. These statements should focus on serving the community,
motivating staff, and assessing the mission’s effectiveness. A mission
should be clear, short and easy to understand.

Hartzell (2002) warns against creating mission or vision statements that
might set up unrealistic expectations. However, well-crafted mission and
vision statements can be very useful, and are popular with many
libraries because they give a concise view and direction for their
organization. He cautions that librarians must be careful to create
realistic statements. It is tempting craft an idealistic vision
statement, and list all of the desired outcomes no matter how likely
they are to occur. The statements, however, are official documents about
the library. Patrons and board members may hold the librarians
accountable, so they must be sure to choose achievable goals and
actions.

Dougherty (2002) points out the importance of including all library
staff in creating the vision, explaining that management should consider
how “empowering people to help shape the environment in which they live
and work is most likely to create a supportive staff that is willing to
sustain efforts to create new futures” (Dougherty, 2002). Management
will benefit from evaluating how changes may affect employees. The
library staff will be experiencing most of the pressure from the changes
and may become overwhelmed. Management may be more successful in gaining
staff support when the staff members are invested in the process of
creating and implementing the vision.

Although organizations create values statements to guide their work and
communicate their beliefs to patrons, it is often difficult to define
the values. Joey Rogers (1998) contends that one of the primary areas of
disagreement is the separation of personal values from professional and
organizational values, and from those of library constituents.
Attempting to keep personal values out of the professional sphere can be
difficult and can create hostility when people are not in agreement.
According to Rogers (1998), “strong personal values often filter and
shape our understanding of professional values and we confuse the two”
(p. 68). The values held by the individual might not align with the
values of library users, funders, and other stakeholders, especially on
controversial topics like intellectual freedom. Rogers (1998) suggests
that library values can change overtime based on changes in patrons and
communities (p. 69).

Rogers (1998) divides core values into three categories in libraries:
words, and people. Libraries are public repositories and dispensaries of
learning and knowledge based in language to serve humanity, so it only
makes sense that their core values reflect this foundation. Word
meanings can be arbitrary, so it is necessary to be careful with word
selection and clear about the intended meaning. Libraries are open to a
diverse public; the goal of many libraries is to provide services and
facilities that are accessible for all users. The values of all
libraries support users’ rights to information access. According to
Rogers, “because we value individuals we have enacted policies and
practices that speak eloquently of their rights and worth” (p. 70).
Additionally, she goes on to say that the pursuit of knowledge is no
longer an individual endeavor, but one undertaken by groups,
particularly in times of increasing use of online collaboration. For
this reason, libraries must recognize that “people in groups can matter,
too” (p. 70).

##School Libraries

Svenningsen and Cherepon (1998) address the issue of creating a mission
statement in the technological age. They state that collection
development, which should be addressed in the mission statement, must
include digital devices and materials. A library’s mission statement
should both support the mission of the larger institution, and support
the library’s growth. Libraries should work in conjunction with their
larger institutions. The mission statement must be unforgettable and
forthright. The mission statement should be able to be familiar with it
without it being an abstract concept. The mission statement must contain
a clear statement about digital resources such as DVDs, Internet,
databases and CD-ROMs. Ultimately, it supports the library and its staff
when retrieving technological devices.

Kelly and Joseph (2010) have created a youth services strategy that
could be successfully applied to the P------ Middle School Library. A
key emphasis of the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA)
mission is providing youth with access to quality library services that
fulfill both their educational and recreational needs. Teens should also
be respected as patrons with unique needs, and included in
decision-making about youth services and collection development.

The literature on library-specific vision statement creation is sparse,
but there is ample writing on the future of school libraries. Mihailidis
and Diggs (2010) describe some changes that are happening in school
libraries in the digital age. They point out that school libraries, like
public libraries, are increasingly being reinvented as places of
knowledge in general, and not just book repositories. School libraries
are also becoming collaborative social centers, where students come to
work together. The authors stress the need for more education, both in
classes and in school media centers, to help students keep pace with
technology changes. Many students need instruction on how to research
effectively, particularly in regards to evaluating the accuracy and
reliability of information. School libraries are an ideal place for
students to learn these skills and lay gain the foundation for
educational success.

Technology and critical thinking skills are also McPherson’s (2008)
focus in his article on school libraries. The author recognizes the
changing habits of youth in the modern world, with the growing use of
web searches and social networking, and stresses the need of school
libraries to help students with these changes. He points out that a
large proportion of young computer users are harassed, bullied, or
propositioned over the Internet. Youth need to develop the skills to
discern between helpful and harmful computer use. McPherson (2008)
suggests guidelines for school library instructional planning, as well
as links to several activities and classes that libraries can implement
to help students develop the skills they need.

##Mission, Vision, and Values Statements for the P------ Middle School
Library Media Center

###Mission Statement

The mission of the P------ Middle School Library Program is to foster
information literacy and a love of reading in P------ students, and to
provide a safe and supportive environment for P------ students to study,
research, read, collaborate, and relax. The library pursues this mission
by providing access to print and digital resources, implementing
scholastic and enrichment programming, collaborating with teachers, and
maintaining a safe and inviting physical space.

###Vision Statement

All P------ Middle School students will be able to locate, utilize, and
cite appropriate information to respond to any academic or
extra-curricular information need. All students will know how to select
a pleasure reading book and will read on a daily basis. All members of
the school community will feel welcome to enter the library at any time
in order to utilize human, technological, or print resources, as well as
the library space.

###Values Statement

We, the P------ Middle School Library staff, intend to uphold the
mission and vision statement with certain values in mind:

1.  We respect and value all students’ voices. We consider their needs,
    ideas and requests integral to the work of the library.

2.  We embrace diversity of all types including gender, race and
    ethnicity, sexual orientation, age, and ability. We believe that
    all members of the school community, including students, faculty,
    staff, and families, have valuable contributions to make to the
    library.

3.  We aim to create information literate students capable of succeeding
    and thriving in the 21st century. Technology is changing rapidly
    and students must receive instruction to keep pace with those
    changes. Students must develop technology skills to be successful
    in school and to be competitive candidates for higher education
    and employment.

4.  We will foster the development of a student body with respect,
    responsibility, integrity, and overall superior character.
    Students are capable of meeting high academic and behavioral
    standards.

5.  The library is a welcoming, safe, and comfortable environment for
    intellectual pursuits, enrichment, and enjoyment.

6.  The library is an integral part of the curriculum and is responsible
    for upholding the school standards of an academically challenging
    curriculum. The library collaborates with teachers to provide
    high-quality instruction to students in relevant areas.

##Environmental Scan

###History and Demographics

<aside>

Content removed to avoid identifying the Middle School involved. Note that
I did not write this section, so this does not remove anything relevent
from this portfolio.

</aside>

###Funding

According to the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission
(CDIAC) California currently has almost 10 million dollars of debt
(California Office of Treasury, 2010). As a result the amount of money
allocated for schools is at risk. In early 2011 Gov. Jerry Brown
threatened to cut educational funding if an unpopular extension on taxes
was not approved. During this time Brown was facing immense pressure to
realign the state budget and decrease the deficit (Harrington, 2011).
Even with budgetary constraints, the state of California still spends
half of every tax dollar on education funding. While this seems like a
progressive measure, the amount is still shrinking under deficit
pressure (California Budget Project, 2011). The county has been
struggling to maintain funding for education. In 2004 a parcel tax
initiative was proposed to increase funding for educational purposes,
specifically for athletic, academic, and support programs
(SmartVoter.Org, 2004).

This initiative failed to gain the required two-thirds vote. West Contra
Costa County Unified School District was facing the closure of several
libraries as well as the prospect of losing sports programs and guidance
counselors (Zamora, 2004). Another attempt occurred in a June special
election, finally gaining the needed votes, but not until after a highly
organized media and protest campaign by students, teachers and concerned
citizens (Zamora, 2004). These measures had faced opposition from local
advocates opposing new taxes, instead demanding more accountability for
district budgets (May, 2004). The measure passed in time to avoid
layoffs from the district which was facing a 16.5 million dollar
deficit. The measure failed to receive enough support for renewal
another attempt at funding passed with a new parcel tax proposal,
measure D in 2008. In light of recent political changes in the community
there is a possibility that there may be difficulty with the upcoming
renewal in 2014.

The funds from the current parcel tax are managed by an eleven member
budget oversight committee. The committee is made up of school district
administrators and employees, and votes on the allocation of funds for
school district needs. The priority for allocation of funds includes
renovations at five schools and the construction of a track facility.
There are several other departments competing for funding as well
including athletics, administration, and facilities maintenance.
Undoubtedly libraries face steep competition as a funding priority
(WCCUSD, n.d.).

###Economic Trends

<aside>

Content removed to avoid identifying the Middle School involved. Note that
I did not write this section, so this does not remove anything relevent
from this portfolio.

</aside>

###Political and Cultural Trends

<aside>

Content removed to avoid identifying the Middle School involved. Note that
I did not write this section, so this does not remove anything relevent
from this portfolio.

</aside>

###Competitors

Currently the greatest threats to library usage within the middle school
are the increasing popularity of digital media entertainment. When faced
with options such as video games, social media, and general Internet
usage, students may not choose the library. Other potential threats
include the growing popularity of athletic and extracurricular
activities which place an emphasis on physical prowess over intellectual
ability.

###Physical Location

P------ Middle School is located in a primarily residential neighborhood
in the town of E------, but it is in an area with multiple community
resources. Around the school are a private school, a park that is used
by P------ students for physical education class and after-school
sports, a community theater, a preschool, and a community center and
swimming pool. The portables where the school is located are situated
below the former school site, a building that is no longer in use due to
seismic dangers. Construction will begin on a new school site in January
2012, and the school is expected to occupy the new site at the beginning
of the 2014-2015 school year (A. B------, personal communication, October
7, 2011).

##SWOT Analysis

The P------ Middle School Library Media Center is considered by many
parents, faculty, and administrators to be one of the most welcoming and
safe spaces on the campus. Although the library is housed in a double
portable, the atmosphere is warm. The dull beige walls are covered in
student art, information about the school, and posters about reading and
research. Colorful books fill the shelves and almost every shelf has a
book turned outward on display. There are several rugs with comfortable
beanbag chairs, and a variety of magazines to choose from (PTSA,
personal communication, October 2011). The P------ librarian, A------
B------, is also a co-author of this paper.

###Strengths

When students are in the library it feels like a community—unlike public
libraries, all of the patrons know and interact with each other. It is
also non-traditional because it’s not a silent library. Patrons
collaborate during class time and play games and socialize at lunch.
Students use the library heavily before and after school, and during
lunch. The school has two separate lunch periods, one for seventh
graders and one for eighth graders. Approximately 20% of the school
population enters the library each day at lunch to read books and
magazines, work on homework, use the computers, and play one of the 50
board games and card games that are available for use in the library (A.
B------, Personal communication, October 7, 2011). There is less need to
recruit patrons than in a public library, because the students are a
captive audience during the school day. At times, the library appears to
be a community center with a lot of reading materials.

The library houses several of the school’s enrichment programs,
including the spelling bee, an anti-violence program, and the National
Junior Honor Society. The librarian is a leader on campus and has
supported or developed these programs. There is also a motivational
reading program: students can read a book, and then complete a review
sheet. The sheets are then posted on a bulletin board to provide
recommendations for other students to utilize (M. B------, personal
communication, October 2011).

The library does benefit from strong support from administrators,
faculty and staff, as well as from parents. The administrators encourage
the librarian to develop projects and to be involved with the school,
and provide the library with any possible funding to purchase materials.
Teachers often get support from the librarian and encourage students to
utilize the library’s resources. As a former middle school teacher, Ms.
B------ has both a teaching background and an ability to interact with
students in a positive and supportive way. The parents provide support
via funding from the Parent-Teacher-Student Association, donations of
books and other materials, and volunteer and fundraising time.

The library has some funding available from the school district that can
be used to purchase books and supplies. The exact amount will not be
known until the budget is released from the district to the school in
December 2011 or January 2012 (Personal communication with A. S------,
October 15, 2011). The librarian also received a \$2,000 grant from
Donor’s Choose in September 2010. The grant provided rugs, beanbag
chairs, a printer, games, books, and small prizes that are used in
competitions.

###Weaknesses

The entire school was moved out of its original building during summer
2010 because the building is seismically unsafe. The school is contained
in portable classrooms until the new building is built. The library is
contained in two portables, and only has space for four tables and 30
chairs (A. B------, Personal communication, October 7, 2011). During
lunchtime or when a class is visiting the library, it is difficult to
move around. The small space is inadequate to support the number of
patrons who would like to utilize the library. At very busy times,
students will arrive and then leave because they see that there is no
available space. Many P------ classes have an enrollment of 36 students,
so there is not enough space for an entire class to come into the
library and work. There is only enough space to house the collection,
and very little space for displays or information. The librarian does
not have an office and has her materials organized into one bookshelf,
several drawers, and two cupboards. Half of the counter space is taken
up by two computers, a large laminating machine, and a student printer.
The lack of space forces the librarian to spend time each day looking
for places to store materials, and she cannot have multiple projects in
progress at the same time (A. B------, personal communication, October 9,
2011).

The library has poor technology and a small collection. The eight
student computers are outdated and often take several minutes to log in
and start up. The computers run very slowly, but will not be replaced
until the school moves to the new campus. The library has 8,615 books
(A. Strand, personal communication, October 12, 2011). Prior to the move
the collection was larger, but one third of the books were weeded and
discarded when the school moved out of its old building and into the
campus of portables (D. R------, personal communication, April 2011).

While there are some funding options as described in the section on
strengths, public school funding in California is extremely limited at
this time and the library has to make careful purchasing decisions. In
addition, at times the school has to make very fast decisions about how
to spend money, which doesn’t leave enough time to carefully consider
the best purchases (A. B------, personal communication, October 18, 2011).
California education funding is decreasing with the budget problems.

The school day runs from 8:10 to 2:25, and the librarian’s hours are
7:45-2:45. Approximately 1.5 hours of the seven hour day are taken up by
the two different lunchtimes, and another 45 minutes is taken up by the
Ms. B------’s breaks. This leaves less than five hours per day for her to
complete projects, collaborate with teachers, check in and shelve books,
and keep the library in order. A textbook manager assists with
supervision and support during the lunch periods, but is not available
during other times of day to help with library tasks (A. B------, personal
communication, October 6, 2011).

###Opportunities

The opportunities for the library are things that could make the library
more than a place to read and use the computer. The opportunities
utilize the expertise of the librarian and support student achievement
of the California State Content Standards (California Department of
Education, 1997-2001) and the School Library Standards (California
Department of Education, 2010).

While there are some teachers who utilize the library’s resources for
research and projects, many teachers never communicate with the
librarian or bring their classes to the library. The librarian could
initiate more collaboration with teachers, and provide whole-class
information literacy instruction. Ms. B------ planned one project with a
teacher during the previous school year and taught several information
literacy and research lessons (K. B------, personal communication, May
2011). It was a successful collaboration and could be repeated, although
that teacher transferred to a different school.

Another area of opportunity is in finding a way to engage a more
academically diverse group of students with the library. Many of the
library patrons are students in honors classes who earn A’s and B’s.
This presents an opportunity for the library to design some programs
that draw a wider range of students. If they library takes advantage of
this opportunity they will be serving a larger portion of the school
community. This could help make the library feel more essential to the
school community (A. B------, personal communication, October 9, 2011).

The library could better take advantage of parent and student
volunteers. Although several parents do volunteer, many others are
interested. Ms. B------ could take the initiative to contact each of these
parents who have expressed interest and discuss their particular
strengths and their availability. This presents an opportunity to have a
weekly volunteer schedule of adults who could perform clerical tasks
such as checking in and shelving books, straightening and cleaning the
library, and performing system cleanups on the computers. Student
volunteers could shelve books, but most are not familiar with the
shelving systems in the library. If students were trained in the
library’s organization and cataloging systems, they could also help with
the task of daily shelving (A. B------, personal communication, October
19, 2011).

Along with the rest of the school, the library will be moving into a new
building at a nearby site. The plans for the new site are complete, but
construction has not yet begun. The estimated move-in date is for the
2014 school year. Based on the architectural plans, the new library is
spacious, will have 35 up-to-date computers, a teaching area in the
library, and numerous display areas. The library and textbook room will
be joined, and the librarian will have an office with space to complete
projects and plan programs. After the move, the librarian and textbook
manager will have the task of setting up the library to best utilize the
space and continue the precedent of the library as an important
community space on campus. Collaboration and co-teaching will be
significantly easier when the library is moved into a new space, but
this is still three years schools away (Go P------!, 2011).

###Threats

One major threat facing the library is the possibility that the program
could lose funding. This would eliminate the librarian’s salary, the
only library worker with a teaching credential. It is necessary to have
a teaching credential to supervise students at the school during the
school day, and without the librarian the library would most likely be
closed. If the library was defunded and kept open by volunteers, it
would only serve the rudimentary function of checking out books to
students. The librarian’s salary is funded by the parcel tax that will
come up for re-election in 2013 (D. V------, personal communication,
September 2010).

P------ Middle School is threatened by declining enrollment due to
several factors. The school has had safety problems in the past, and
safety has greatly improved but continues to be an area of concern. In
May 2008, students threw rocks at a teacher when she would not admit
them into a classroom. In December 2009, a 14-year-old boy student was
charged with raping a 12-year-old girl student in a stairwell during the
school day, despite increased safety measures following the rock
throwing incident earlier in the year. Both incidents attracted
significant negative media attention, and many students spoke about
feeling unsafe at the school. Parents stepped in to form a safety
committee and the situation did begin to improve. In the 2008-2009
school years there were 381 suspensions, including 76 incidents of
violence or force (Tucker, 2009). As these incidents came to light,
local parents began looking for alternative middle schools. Many chose
private schools, or found ways to send their students to neighboring
schools in more affluent districts such as Albany. The local elementary
schools used to go from kindergarten to fifth grade. They have now all
added sixth grades, also contributing to declining enrollment at
P------, which used to have sixth grade students. It is now only seventh
and eighth grade (K. B------, personal communication, November 2010).
Declining enrollment at P------ threatens the library for two reasons.
The budget is affected because the school receives funding for each
pupil. If enrollment declined enough, the school would be closed and
consequently the library would close.

<aside>

Content removed to avoid identifying the Middle School involved. Note that
I did not write this section, so this does not remove anything relevent
from this portfolio.

</aside>

Ms. B------ has a teaching credential but does not yet have a library
media specialist credential or a master’s degree in library and
information science (MLIS). She works under an emergency librarian
credential which is granted by the state when there is not a fully
credentialed librarian who has applied for the job. As she proceeds
through the MLIS program at San Jose State University, Ms. B------ has
learned something in each class that is helping her to be a more
effective librarian. A fully qualified librarian may be able to design a
more robust library program based more fully on best practices for
school libraries. Currently, she makes decisions for the library based
on her teaching background and general work experience (A. B------,
personal communication, October 7, 2011).

A last threat to the library is the salary and benefits structure in the
school district. The librarian is paid on the same salary scale as
teachers in the district, which is one of the lowest-paying districts in
the San Francisco East Bay. The district health benefits are also
becoming more expensive (WCSD, 2011). When Ms. B------ completes her
library media specialist credential and her MLIS, she may seek out a
higher-paying position. The library has changed each time the librarian
changes. Ms. B------ was hired two weeks before school began for the
2010-2011 school year, and her first day of work was the day before
school began. She initially received no formal training and only several
hours of informal training on using the computer system. When she first
began, the library was the double portable with empty shelves, filled
with 200 boxes of books and other materials. With no formal library
experience and only one MLIS class completed, Ms. B------ decided how to
set up the library in the best possible configuration. It took almost an
entire year of making decisions and adjustments to make the library as
functional as possible in its small space.

If Ms. B------ stays in the position for an extended period of time, she
can establish programs and procedures that will endure beyond her tenure
as librarian. However, the way the school system is currently set up,
she would not have the opportunity to train the new librarian. If she
leaves soon for a better economic opportunity, the next librarian would
again be starting from square one.

##Conclusion

The P------ Middle School Library has a bright future despite its many
challenges. The school has a strong administrative, teaching, and
library staff. While the resources may not be abundant, there is funding
and support available that can help turn the vision into reality. Many
of the challenges facing the library are common to urban public school
libraries around California, but they can be mitigated by the strengths
of the library and the school. While it is difficult to be at a
temporary site in a small space, the library has the potential to
develop initiatives and practices that can be implemented on a larger
scale when the new school is completed. The literature review,
environmental scan, and analysis of the library’s strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats have guided the creation of a clear vision
and mission. The newly developed mission and vision statements will
provide a focused beginning point to develop clear objectives in part
two of the strategic plan. Those objectives will shape the future of the
library to help make it an indispensable part of the P------ Middle
School community.

<div class="references">

##References

Allison, M., & Kaye, J. (2005). Strategic planning for nonprofit
organizations: A practical guide and workbook. (2nd ed.) Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons Inc.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011). Databases, Tables, and Calculators by
Subject. Retrieved fromhttp://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS14000000

California Budget Project (June 2011). Retrieved from
http://www.cbp.org/pdfs/2011/110728\_Where\_Do\_State\_Tax\_Dollars\_Go\_pb.pdf

California Department of Education (1997-2001). Content Standards.
Retrieved from http://www.cde.ca.gov/be/st/ss/

California Department of Education (2010). Model school library
standards for California public schools, kindergarten through grade
twelve. Retrieved from http://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/lb/

California Office of the Treasury (n.d.). About CDIAC. Retrieved from
http://www.treasurer.ca.gov/cdiac/

Dougherty, R. M. (2002). Planning for New Library Futures. _Library
Journal_, _127_(9), 38.

Flagg, G. (2000). Core values, outsourcing dominate agenda. (2000).
_American Libraries_, _31_(8), 81-83.

Fradkin, P. L. (2005). The great earthquake and firestorms of 1906: How
San Francisco nearly destroyed itself. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Fugazzotto, S. (2009). Mission statements, physical space and strategy
in higher education. _Innovative Higher Education_, _34_(5), 285-298. doi:
10.1007/s10755-009-9118-z

Harrington, T. (2011, February 3) Do California School Districts Spend
Efficiently? Contra Costa Time. Retrieved from
http://www.ibabuzz.com/onassignment/2011/02/03/do-california-school-districts-spend-funds-efficiently/

Hartzell, G. (2002). Controlling your own destiny. _School Library
Journal_, _48_(11), 37.

Hartzell, G. (2002). Promises you can’t keep. _School Library Journal_,
_49_(12), 31.

Jameson, E., & Armitage, S. H. (1997). Writing the range: Race, class,
and culture in the women's West. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Johnson, C. (2004, March 15) Hercules schools may jump ship / West
Contra Costa's troubles push issue. SF Gate. Retrieved from
http://articles.sfgate.com/2004-03-15/bay-area/17415442\_1\_separate-district-west-county-hercules

Kelly, P., & Joseph, M. (2010). Developing a youth services strategy
framework for public libraries. _Aplis_, _23_(2), 56-60.

Kranich, N. (2006). The civic mission of school libraries. _Knowledge
Quest_, _34_(4), 10-17.

Laws, D. L. (2003). Silicon Valley: Exploring the communities behind the
digital revolution. Menlo Park, Calif: Windy Hill.

May, M. (2004, February 7) Schools' requests for funds draw mixed
reactions. The SF Gate. Retrieved from
http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/2004/02/27/EBG0656RJB1.DTL

McPherson, K. (2008). Shaping global criticality with school libraries.
School Libraries Worldwide, 14(2), 35-44.

Mihailidis, P., & Diggs, V. (2010). From Information Reserve to Media
Literacy Learning Commons: Revisiting the 21st Century Library as the
Home for Media Literacy Education. _Public Library Quarterly_, _29_(4),
279-292. doi: 10.1080/01616846.2010.525389

Rogers, J. (1998). Core values: Our common ground. _American Libraries_,
_29_(9), 68-71.

Svenningsen, K., & Cherepon, L. (1998). Revisiting library mission
statements in the era of technology. _Collection Building_, _17_(1), 16-19.
doi: 10.1108/01604959810368956

</div>
