---
abstract: |
    This document is the second in a series of two, detailing a strategic
    plan for the Portola Middle School Media Center. In it the authors
    detail four goals and associated objectives for the media center,
    informed by the mission, vision, and values statements and environmental
    scan from part one of the strategic plan. These goals include the
    creation of a formal infrastructure, strategies for recruiting
    infrequent library users, increasing collaboration between the library
    and the teachers in the school, and strengthening the library's
    partnerships with other libraries in the school district. Specific
    objectives and assessment criteria are included. The document also
    includes an annotated bibliography focusing on the current research
    regarding mission, vision, and values statements for libraries and media
    centers.
class: LIBR 204
date: '11/04/2011'
title: 'Portola Middle School Media Center Strategic Plan (Part Two)'
...

Authors:

-   Nicole Barnabei
-   Allyson Bogie
-   Pamela Dixon
-   Karlin Hicks
-   Veronica Juarez-Carrillo
-   Jason Seeley

Part Two: Strategic Goals, Assessments, and Annotated Bibliography
------------------------------------------------------------------

Part one of the strategic plan for the Portola Middle School Library
Media Center evaluated the center’s strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats, as well as assessing environmental factors,
and providing guidance on creating a mission, vision, and values
statements. From the SWOT analysis, environmental scan, and literature
review, the authors developed a mission statement, a vision statement,
and associated values to guide the strategic planning process. The
authors then evaluated all aspects of part one of the strategic plan to
develop goals, and related objectives, for the library media center. The
goals and objectives draw directly on the stated mission, vision, and
values to provide a clear focus for the library’s work. Each objective
includes an action plan and an assessment method, allowing the library
to begin working on the goals, and evaluate progress toward fulfilling
its mission and achieving its vision. Although the library is small and
is located on the temporary school campus, it plays a significant role
in the school community and the recommended actions should enable the
library to make an even more substantial contribution to learning and
recreation at the school. This paper also includes an annotated
bibliography of resources that can be used to guide other organizations
in developing their mission, vision, and values statements.

Goal 1: Establish a Formal Structure
------------------------------------

### Objective 1.1:

*Create a training manual for new employees and volunteers.*

**Action Plan:** The library will create a training manual that will
cover all library operations. This manual will define both employee and
volunteer duties. The library employees covered will include the
credentialed school librarian and library assistant. Volunteer duties
will be defined as assisting with shelving books, keeping the library
neat, and other projects determined by the librarian. The manual will
include instructions for all major library operations such as
cataloging, shelving, class visits, lunchtime activities, and computer
guidelines. All the daily, monthly, annual and special event operations
will be outlined. There will be an annual update on the manual.

**Assessment:** An assessment will be conducted by a usage trial with
the substitute librarian. Following this period, the substitute
librarian will be asked for feedback and any final revisions or
corrections will be made.

### Objective 1.2:

*Develop an active, strong and effective volunteer base Portola Middle
School’s library. Volunteers can assist with daily library operations as
well as special events. Volunteers can also serve as library advocates
within the community and to the school district. Eventually, the
volunteers will create a fundraising structure.*

**Action Plan:** The head librarian will collaborate with Portola Middle
School’s Parent-Teacher-Student Association (PTSA) to recruit
volunteers. Recruitment actions can include fliers sent home with
students to attract interested volunteers, and emails to the PTSA e-tree
mailing list. The volunteer opportunity can also be advertised through
volunteermatch.org. Initial meetings and orientations will be set up by
the librarian during school hours. The librarian will create a volunteer
database and coordinate volunteer schedules.

**Assessment:** The program success will be measured by the number of
volunteers recruited. The goal for the media center is to generate and
train four volunteers within four months from the implementation with
the ongoing effort to recruit one new volunteer every two months.

### Objective 1.3:

*Create and utilize a Teen Council for guidance on library acquisitions,
purchases, special events and library policies.*

**Action Plan:** Students will be recruited using on-campus marketing
tools such as fliers and PA announcements to advertise the new club. The
first official meeting will be created with the librarian, assistant
librarian, or a teacher as mentor. The teen council will make
recommendations to the library with regards to what books and media
should be acquired, as well as recommendations and feedback on special
events. The teen council may also plan council events. The teen council
will meet at least two times per month during lunch time.

**Assessment:** The standard for success will be to maintain six active
members on the council. The council will be able to accommodate more if
desired.

Goal 2: Improve the effectiveness of the library by increasing collaboration between the library and both classes within the school and with other libraries in the school district.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Objective 2.1:

*Promote information literacy by helping create lessons that integrate
the library into the classroom.*

**Action plan:** In each term of instruction, the librarian will work
with the teachers in each department to help develop lesson plans and
projects that utilize the library. A minimum of one class per semester
should be developed with the purpose of teaching students to use the
library for research. This research need not be limited to books, but
also aim to integrate other media holdings as well as teaching students
how to identify scholarly sources on the internet. The librarian will
continue to evaluate the lessons with teachers and improve upon them
each term.

**Assessment:** The teachers will assess the success of the lessons
based on the number of students utilizing additional research, the
students using correct references in their research, and the students’
ability to put the works into their own words.

### Objective 2.2:

*Encourage library use by providing support to the school through
learning and research guides.*

**Action plan:** By working with the teachers in each department, the
librarian will expand the development and use of learning and research
guides to help support lessons and curriculum. This should include
simple one-page guides to a subject to help start research, as well as
going further by setting up a corner section or a table as a resource
center for a current topic, with books and other resources on display.
The librarian will work with the teachers individually to determine what
level of support is most appropriate, and what resources the library has
on hand to support each module.

**Assessment:** Assessment will be based on the usage of the resource
center by students to support their learning, and a teacher evaluation
of how well the resource center helped support the lesson.

### Objective 2.3:

*Strengthen partnerships with other West Contra Costa Unified School
District libraries by working together on projects.*

**Action Plan:** Collaborate with other librarians within the district
to develop reading programs that will provide students with an engaging,
fun, and creative avenue to embrace reading. One example is a literary
trivia contest to be held at each school. Students within the district
will have the chance to vote on ten books at their school (five for
middle school students and five for high school). In teams of three to
four participants, each student will be required to become an expert on
at least one book. The winning team will advance to a district wide
contest.

**Assessment:** Success for the first activity will be gauged by the
number of student participants and the number of questions correctly
answered. Additionally, students will be asked to participate in an
online survey to answer questions about their experience in the project,
their opinions on the books selected, and the trivia questions, in order
to judge their learning and to evaluate the activity for the following
year. Any other district-wide reading programs can be assessed in
similar ways.

Goal 3: Recruit infrequent library users by creating a fun and inclusive environment for all students.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Objective 3.1:

*Form a “hot” book club.*

**Action Plan:** With the assistance of the teen council, the library
will recruit students to participate in a “hot” book club. Fliers will
be created and given to each home classroom to recruit students for the
club. In the initial meeting students will vote on the popular book they
would like to read. The librarians will provide guidance on possible
book choices. Students will read one book every two weeks. The book club
will meet at least twice a month during lunch time or after class.

**Assessment:** A minimum of fifteen active students will be a
measurement of success for the book club.

### Objective 3.2:

*Implement an incentive program to increase library usage and
awareness.*

**Action Plan:** The librarian, along with the library volunteers or the
teen council, will create incentives to attract more students to the
library. These incentive programs should target specific student groups
who rarely or never use the library. One example of an incentive program
is to create a raffle. Each student will be asked to read a specific
popular young adult book from the library’s collection, and create a
form of art inspired by the book. The art forms can be a paper, a
drawing, a graphic novel adaption, a sculpture, or other artwork. Once
the artwork is submitted, the student will be given a ticket and entered
into a raffle. Raffle prizes should come from donations or a reasonable
budget, and may include small electronics and gift certificates to
popular stores.

**Assessment:** Raffles will be deemed successful by the amount of
students who enter into the raffles, and the number of new library users
who enter. The increase in users or raffle entrants can be used as a
tool to measure future projects of a similar nature.

### Objective 3.3:

*Improve the collection of non-English materials.*

**Action plan:** Identify a specific portion of the acquisitions budge
for non-English and foreign language holdings. The emphasis of this
effort should be students who are second-language English speakers, with
the secondary goal of languages actively taught as part of the
curriculum to include Spanish, Chinese and Arabic. The inclusion of a
variety of materials will support learning in class, as well as provide
recreation for the students and increase awareness of the diversity of
the student body.

**Assessment:** Assessment will be based on the number of materials
acquired, the variety acquired, and the circulation of the materials
among the students.

### Objective 3.4:

*Celebrate cultural awareness events.*

**Action plan:** Throughout the school year, designate certain days or
time periods to build awareness of culture and diversity. This can
include foreign or ethnic cultures, American sub-cultures, and holidays.
For these events, volunteers can build a display within the library
about the culture or event, along with related materials. If possible
and appropriate to the event, try to coordinate with the cafeteria to
serve a related food to increase awareness and participation. Additional
ways to participate may be designed and implemented by the school's teen
council.

**Assessment:** Assessment is based on the number of events celebrated,
student participation at the library, and circulation of related
materials.

Goal 4: Conduct ongoing development and promotion of the library as a modern media center.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Objective 4.1:

*Educate students and faculty on the use of technology in the library
through integrated projects.*

**Action Plan:** Invite students and faculty to the library to learn how
to use library computers to conduct research. Include brief lessons on
catalog searches, using databases, and online indexes, as well as using
e-readers.

**Assessment:** Will be based on the increase in patronage and increase
in use of technology resources by students and faculty.

### Objective 4.2:

*Create a blog or social media page to promote the library and interact
with students online.*

**Action Plan:** This online presence will be created and updated weekly
to inform students of events taking place in the library. Additionally,
it will serve to notify students of upcoming additions to the collection
and note books that might be of interest. The librarian, assistant
librarian, and library volunteers will answer students’ questions online
via email or regular posts. This “ask the librarian” feature will enable
students to receive fast responses and increase students’ use of
technology.

**Assessment:** Success of this objective will depend on the number of
subscribers or followers and the number of questions asked and answered
online.

### Objective 4.3:

*Develop a committee for the future planning of the library’s new
building.*

**Action Plan:** Portola Middle School, including the library media
center, will have a new building in three years. The librarian will
create a committee within three months made up of school staff, parents,
and students to seek input for the future library. This committee will
make suggestions on layout, activities, library operations, and anything
else that seems relevant for the new library and building. The committee
will meet once each month, with at least one change or affirmation
drafted at each meeting.

**Assessment:** By the end of the school year there should be five to
seven changes documented, with this list updated annually.

Annotated Bibliography
----------------------

<div class="references">

Allison, M., & Kaye, J. (2005). *Strategic planning for nonprofit
organizations: A practical guide and workbook.* (2nd ed.) Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons Inc.

</div>

In this handbook, Allison and Kaye attempt to lay out all the steps and
actions needed to create a strategic plan for any nonprofit
organization. They include chapters on preparing for a strategic plan,
creating the mission, vision, and values statements for the
organization, debating priorities and actually writing the plan, and
ways to implement the strategy and evaluate it for later refinement.
They also include several appendices with worksheets, samples,
assessments, and additional related techniques for evaluation. The third
chapter is devoted entirely to the creation of mission, vision, and
values statements. The authors explain that these statements can help
tell others about the organization, can help people within the
organization understand it better, and can form a core that guides the
organization in what it does now, and where it is going in the future.
The chapter includes several examples of these statements, both good and
bad, and is largely made up of step-by-step directions on how to create
these statements from the less organized thoughts and phrases that
likely already exist before the creation of a strategic plan. The
authors emphasise the need for clear and concise language, and suggest
starting with simple single sentences and clarifying the final
statements from that base. They go on to suggest strong discussions
among the staff so that everyone's voice can be heard, and everyone
agrees and understands the core values, beliefs, and direction of the
organization before even beginning the strategic plan proper. This book
as a whole, and the third chapter in particular, is a valuable tool for
anyone creating a strategic plan. It breaks down the daunting tasks of
creating a mission, vision, and values statement into manageable steps
with easy to follow worksheets. It takes the large and abstract and
makes it simple and specific, and should be a first stop for people just
getting starting to create the mission, vision, and values statements
for their library.

<div class="references">

Dougherty, R. M. (2002). Planning for New Library Futures. *Library
Journal, 127*(9), 38.

</div>

Dougherty provides an overview of modern strategic planning resources,
offers practical resources for strategic planning, lists essential
elements for a successful process, and cautions against pitfalls. He
begins his overview by explaining that in the past, strategic planning
tools didn’t consider external environmental factors that can have
significant effects on organizations. The SWOT analysis and
environmental scan are newer features of a strategic plan that take into
account the rapidly changing environmental factors that influence a
library. Dougherty explains that when designing a vision, it’s important
to include all staff members or at least staff members at all levels of
the library, in the process. The vision should be idealistic and
service-focused in order to inspire and motivate staff members, and yet
it must also be practical enough to be manageable to implement. To make
the organization’s vision an even more practical tool, leadership must
follow through on their commitments related to the strategic plan. They
must also be flexible and accept that the plan has to be fluid and
flexible. The author lists both fundamental characteristics of a
successful strategic planning process, and common pitfalls of the
process. He also includes a case study of the Ann Arbor, Michigan
library system. The library system implemented the Future Search model
for their strategic planning process, which has ultimately transformed
the library and improved its services to the community. The author
includes useful theory, practical suggestions, additional written
resources, and a case study which puts many of the ideas of the article
into context. These four elements combine to make this a readable and
very helpful article for any organization considering or engaged in the
strategic planning process.

<div class="references">

Flagg, G. (2000). Core values, outsourcing dominate agenda. (2000).
*American Libraries, 31*(8), 81-83.

</div>

This article provides an update on the status of the American Library
Association (ALA) efforts to construct their long awaited values
statement. The author explores the major conflict points as well as the
difficulties that the ALA has met while trying to identify core values
that are able to unify the organization. Specifically the conflict
points over intellectual freedom. This was a particular sticking point
because there were members who felt that a major unresolved issue would
later prove to be damaging to under-represented groups within the ALA.
This article was particularly valuable with regards to development of a
plan for a diverse user group. The study of cultural and operational
conflict points was cause for further study. This article was an
excellent resource when considering how values that are too vague or
exclusionary can affect the cohesiveness of an organization. Additional
information in the article explores an unrelated outsourcing proposal.

<div class="references">

Fugazzotto, S. (2009). Mission statements, physical space and strategy
in higher education. *Innovative Higher Education, 34*(5),285-298. doi:
10.1007/s10755-009-9118-z

</div>

In this article, Fugazotto discusses the relationship between mission
statements and physical space at the university level. He begins by
explaining that every organization has a structure and culture, and both
must be taken into account when thinking about the nature of the
organization and any planning processes. They are not completely
separate, and work in tandem to define any organization. Organizational
effectiveness is highly emphasized in the current economic environment,
and is being more carefully monitored than ever before. The author
explains that culture and structure can impact organizational
effectiveness, and describes the two different theories on how this
works. Regardless of whether culture and structure are articulated to
employees, the two factors are going to impact organizational
effectiveness. It is important, then, to be clear about the structure
and culture of an organization. Clarity allows all members of the
organization to be conscious about the structure and culture and to
allow these components to have a positive impact on the organization’s
work. This is where mission statements take a central role in strategic
planning. Fugazzoto goes on to explain that the daily work of an
organization, including its mission, is played out in the physical space
it inhabits. Strategy and physical space work in tandem to fulfill an
organization’s mission and affect organizational effectiveness. This
article can aid in the strategic planning process by guiding an
organization to describe their culture and structure to recognize their
impact on the daily operations and the mission statement of an
organization. Because culture, structure, and physical space will affect
an organization regardless of whether they are acknowledged, they are
important factors to consider when preparing an environmental scan and
SWOT analysis. This article provides guidance on how those factors can
impact an organization to better help with the planning process.

<div class="references">

Hartzell, G. (2002). Controlling your own destiny. *School Library
Journal, 48*(11), 37.

</div>

Hartzell (2002) identifies the importance of understanding the
distinction between a mission and vision in this article. A concise
exploration of both, Hartzell gives excellent examples of the two. The
standard for the vision was an excellent example; it illustrates the
importance of creating a vision that is inspirational and as the article
explains, able to be relevant in the future even as technology changes.
His definition of mission provides a clear standard for comparison by
identifying how core values impact the statement. Hartzell goes further
by explaining how failing to provide clear definitions is equally
problematic. He warns that too vague of a statement can provide room for
incorrect interpretation or fail to motivate. The major lesson of this
article is that it is important not to confuse the mission and vision
statements. He explains that doing so can be counterproductive and
affect the morale of the institution. These recommendations were taken
into consideration during the development process of the plan.

<div class="references">

Hartzell, G. (2002). Promises you can’t keep. *School Library Journal,
49*(12), 31.

</div>

Hartzell addresses the harsh reality of working in a school. He reminds
readers that while the American Library Association suggests that “all
students will become ‘effective users of ideas and information,’”
librarians don’t have the power to make sure that every student
succeeds. School librarians are only able to provide the opportunity for
all students to become effective researchers and lifelong readers. Just
as doctors don’t promise to cure everyone, and lawyers don’t promise to
win every case, educators can’t guarantee every student’s success. Some
of that is left to the students themselves. Based on this reality, he
cautions, mission and vision statements should be short, engaging, and
should only describe what the librarian can actually offer and control.
His message is a sharp contrast to the expectation of success for every
student that is normally put on all school staff, and serves as a
helpful reminder that teachers and librarians must create opportunities
and set high expectations, but ultimately cannot control the actions of
every student.

<div class="references">

Kelly, P., & Joseph, M. (2010). Developing a youth services strategy
framework for public libraries. *Aplis*, *23*(2), 56-60.

</div>

The examples in this article serve as a comprehensive blueprint for the
creation of a vision, mission, and values statement that is specific to
the needs of young adult users. The importance of a narrow focus with
regard to mission is extremely important when considering how much
technological access is needed for this target group. Kelly and Joseph
(2010) provide guidance for the creation of a plan that can serve the
young adult community while still maintaining the ability to integrate
with a larger library plan. This was valuable information for the use of
our plan since the library we selected must fulfill not only its own
mission but those of the school district in which it belongs.

<div class="references">

Kranich, N. (2006). The civic mission of school libraries. *Knowledge
Quest, 34*(4), 10-17.

</div>

Kranich writes about the age-old, but always relevant, topic of
citizenship. She states that a traditional role of school libraries is
to promote civic literacy, and addresses the changing nature of this
responsibility throughout the article. Kranich provides an overview of
the theory of civic engagement, and a history of the civic engagement
movement. Civic engagement and civic literacy have been decreasing in
the past several decades, prompting many initiatives meant to increase
both. She gives examples of diverse programs aimed at increasing civic
engagement, and includes concrete suggestions that could be used in
school libraries. She ends by saying that any library, including a
school library, can be a civic space, a place to enable civic literacy,
a public information forum, a civic information center, a communitywide
reading club, a service-learning center, a partner in public service,
and a champion and advocate of free expression. There are many different
ways that school libraries can foster civic literacy, but it is crucial
that they rekindle civic engagement in the information age. While much
of the current literature on school libraries focuses on technology and
digital information literacy, this article focuses squarely on a more
traditional role of schools and libraries. Civic literacy is an area
that many school libraries might not consider including in their mission
or vision, but can certainly be considered the responsibility of public
institutions. The article adds another layer of responsibility and
opportunity to the role of the school library. Technology and media
literacy are key components of the modern school library, but this is a
more traditional role of the library that might also get included in the
strategic plan. It would be a valuable read for any school library
embarking on a strategic planning process.

<div class="references">

McPherson, K. (2008). Shaping global criticality with school libraries.
*School Libraries Worldwide, 14*(2), 35-44.

</div>

McPherson’s article on global criticality explores the changing role of
school librarians and school libraries in developing new literacies. He
begins by detailing the substantial rise in Internet usage by students,
who use digital media for information, academics, and recreation. While
readers may think of students as being adept at discerning accurate
information from inaccurate, students actually report that they need
more guidance than they are currently getting to help with making
critical decisions about information. School librarians can now teach
digital information literacy in their libraries. Advanced information
literacy skills are crucial not only for academic success, but will also
be increasingly necessary in the workplace. McPherson offers numerous
concrete suggestions and resources for school librarians to use in
information literacy instruction, and emphasizes the important role that
school libraries can play in developing global criticality. Ultimately,
he implies that school librarians can change the world through quality
literacy instruction: they can help develop global criticality, defined
on a basic level as a group of people who have the critical thinking and
communication skills to collaborate across cultures and advocate for
social justice. This article combines theoretical and practical ideas to
inspire school librarians, and give them tools to reach the lofty goal
of teaching global criticality at their schools. The information in this
article would also support a truly 21st century strategic planning
process.

<div class="references">

Mihailidis, P., & Diggs, V. (2010). From Information Reserve to Media
Literacy Learning Commons: Revisiting the 21st Century Library as the
Home for Media Literacy Education. *Public Library Quarterly, 29*(4),
279-292. doi: 10.1080/01616846.2010.525389

</div>

The authors of this article explain the evolution of the school age
library into the media center. The importance of the media center format
is evident in its greater role in facilitating the educational process.
The concept of a media center allows for varying amounts of books,
although researching passive books is not the sole purpose. This article
explains how, aside from serving as a place to conduct research, the
media center can also function as a collaborative space that allows for
group study. The access to new technologies not only attracts new users
to a previously under-used space but also, as the article explains, can
aid in meeting educators’ goals. Media literacy is a necessary skill in
college-level education. By generating new users and educating current
ones, these new formats can assist in the development of critical
thinking and research skills and generate lifetime users. This served as
a valuable tool when modeling our plan for the Portola Middle School
library.

<div class="references">

Rogers, J. (1998). Core values: Our common ground. *American Libraries,
29*(9), 68-71.

</div>

In this article, Joey Rogers puts forth what he sees as the core values
that all librarians should embrace, while relating them to the
individual values that all people hold. He emphasises that the core
professional values for libraries are very different from each person's
personal values. The professional values for libraries are shaped by
their context, three aspects of their context in particular. Their
values are shaped by the history history behind them, with the long
emphasis on learning and public trust that has existed in the United
States. They are formed by the financial realities they face, as they
are publicly funded and must negotiate with their "customers" to meet
their needs while staying true to their own beliefs and abilities.
Finally, they are affected by the perceptions of others, which can be
seen based on what users and funders ask of their libraries. Rogers
identifies three core values that he thinks all libraries adhere to, and
all librarians should be able to agree upon. One is that words matter,
in that they articulate ideas and can have power over people, though
this may need to be expanded in the digital age. The second is that
people matter, all people from all classes and backgrounds, and that
libraries are for everyone. The last is that learning matters, both
formal education and informal and personal learning that people can
forward at the library. The article is a passionate call for librarians
to acknowledge their differences, but to embrace the values we all share
as librarians in order to better serve our patrons. It gives little else
concrete for a library trying to form its own values statement besides
the core three values proposed, but it is nonetheless a valuable article
for understanding where to start for those values, and how to grow from
there.

<div class="references">

Svenningsen, K., & Cherepon, L. (1998). Revisiting library mission
statements in the era of technology. *Collection Building, 17*(1),
16-19. doi: 10.1108/01604959810368956

</div>

This article examines the role of collection building and policy with
regard to a mission statement. Sevnningsen and Cherepon (1998) explain
that commonly new technologies are left out of vision statements to
maintain alignment with cost measures, with the thinking that a vague
policy will permit new technologies when available. As they explain this
can actually be counter-productive to the vision statement, and harm the
development of technology programs in the future. This provided insight
for the group project by allowing us to learn how to develop a cost
effective plan and vision that would allow the growth of
technology-based library access and programs for the project.
