---
class: LIBR 256
date: '2013-08-10'
title: Final Exam
...

Option 3: How has the continuing evolution in information technologies and communications methods affected archivistsâ€™ work and the work of archival researchers? Given your knowledge of the evolution in these technologies (as a user/student/etc.), what issues continue to need addressing? What issues are being posed by some of the newest technologies?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Over the last few decades, information technology has changed nearly
every aspect of modern life, and archives are no exception. Everyone and
everything seems to be connected. Most records of any sort are made on a
computer (or a smart phone), and many of those, more than people
realize, are made available to whoever wants to see them. People can now
take a video of an event on their phone, write a comment about it, and
post both to the internet for all to see (and comment in turn) nearly
instantly. For better or worse, this is changing how people think about
information and access to that information. There is a prevailing
attitude now that nearly everything is (or should be) online and
available at a person's fingertips in seconds, no matter where they are.
Many people have come to expect the ability to find whatever information
they need with just a quick Google search.

The truth is, of course, that this is not possible for the overwhelming
majority of archival materials.

Archives are doing their best to embrace new technology where they can.
Many archives have their finding aids available and searchable on their
websites. Some are even starting to make the contents of their
collection available online, where possible. That phrase though, "where
possible", shows where the problems still lie. It often is not possible
to put archival records online, whether because of technology
limitations, copyright restrictions, or simply because the institution
cannot afford to do so. One of the greatest challenges facing archives
today is to try to meet the modern expectation for digital available
content in the face of these challenges.

For most traditional records, especially for already established
archives with years or decades of materials built up over time, the
first challenge comes in making their collection online-accessible in
the first place. As Kastellec (2012) describes, most archives are simply
unable to put their collections online. The act of digitizing a document
is much more time-consuming and expensive than most people realize. At a
bare minimum, each page must be scanned or photographed. To be truly
useful, though, these files will have to be parsed into text, and since
text recognition is far from perfect, human processors will need to read
through and correct the resultant file. For better searching the files
will have to be encoded with metadata which, again, only the bare
minimum can be done automatically, with more useful data requiring human
processors. Because of the time and cost involved, many institutions
cannot afford to digitize their own collections.

There is also the question of whether it is legal to digitize an item,
let alone make it publicly available online. With copyright limitations
being occasionally murky and many institutions choosing not to digitize
if they are at all uncertain.

Some of these problems are mitigated in the case of born-digital
records, but these are still subject to a number of challenges---which
affect digitized records as well. One problem is that there are
countless different file formats and encodings, making it difficult to
access all files in any kind of consistent manner. Many older file
formats are nearly impossible to read on modern computers---and by
"older" I mean files that can be as little as five or ten yours old.
Even common file formats such as Microsoft Word documents change
drastically from one version to the next, sometimes making them readable
with newer versions of the software, while other formats are simply
obsolete and all but forgotten. In archival practice there is an ever
greater emphasis on standardized and widely readable file formats such
as TEI encoded XML and archival PDF, but even these standards are still
young and changing, and adoption is mixed from one institution to the
next.

Even if a file format is (in theory) readable, the physical media of
digital files is fragile and unreliable. Most digital media has an
expected lifespan of only a few years, as opposed to the decades or
centuries a traditional "hard copy" document can be expected to last. If
not carefully copied, with redundant backups, any digital files could be
corrupted or lost entirely at any time. Even still, migrating files from
older media to new carries a risk of files being damaged or changed. The
measures necessary to make sure digital files are preserved intact are
time consuming and, of course, expensive, making it much less likely
that an institution will be able to do so properly.

If all of these physical and technical problems were solved---and for
now they certainly are not, they can only be mitigated---new technology
is posing questions and challenges about the very ideas and assumptions
of what an archival record is, and whether they all can or should be
preserved. One major challenge with digital records is simply that there
are so many of them, far outnumbering traditional physical records and
growing exponentially. It is quite literally impossible for a person, or
even a whole team of researchers, to sort through and properly appraise
all of the digital records that might apply to their institution. The
explosion of social media such as Twitter, Facebook, and Youtube have
similar exploded the amount of data that exists. Besser (2013) describes
some of the difficulties faced when attempting to build an archives out
of such a massive corpus of data. Perhaps ironically, the only viable
solution is to use more new technology to automate the appraisal and
description of individual pieces of the collection, effectively taking
the archivist out of the process.

Even this is simply a problem of scale, but new technology has brought
with it new formats and new forms of data, challenging ideas about what
can be an archival record. Twitter feeds and Facebook posts, though
difficult to classify, are still at heart textual, and easy to identify
as a record of some sort. Not everything is as easy to reconcile with
traditional ideas of archival records. Multimedia files, relational
databases, and computer software begin to stretch what it means to be a
record, and the definition must stretch further still. As one example,
Watson (2012) demonstrates the difficulty of archiving a video game,
which in many ways must be preserved as a combination of software and
the hardware used to play it. As we go forward, perhaps we will need to
preserve to method of reading a record along with the record itself for
nearly anything digital.

The time we live in is called the Information Age, and with good reason.
There is more information created and made available than in any other
time in human history, and possibly more than in all of human history
*combined*. The question then becomes, what of all that do we preserve,
and how do we preserve so that it can still be read---or heard, or
viewed, or otherwise experienced---unknown decades from now? To some
extant, technology will also help answer these questions, as
preservation media are becoming more robust and interoperable standards
are becoming more common. Technology is, in a way, catching up with
itself. Nonetheless, archives cannot wait for technology to take care of
itself, as the expectation of its use and convenience is certainly here
now. Archival users expect to have information at their fingertips, and
archivists are doing their best---within the limits they have---to
accommodate them.

Option 4: In week one, we noted that "archivists live on the horns of a dilemma," with numerous conflicting goals (preservation vs. use, access vs. privacy, long-term preservation vs. rapidly-changing media). Choose one of these conflicting goals and explore how it affects archival practice (acquisitions, processing, preservation, reference, etc.) and where the profession stands today in balancing this conflict.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The two goals of preservation of materials and giving access to those
materials form a great dichotomy within the archival profession, as they
are both part of the core reason for the existence of an archives, and
yet they are in conflict with each other. One the one hand, archivists
seek to preserve, and therefor protect, the collections under their
care. Their materials can be fragile, and care must be taken so that
they can survive as long as possible. With that in mind, it can be
tempting to literally guard archival collections, keeping them away from
anyone's grubby hands that might damage them. One the other hand,
archives exist to be used. The records in an archives are not kept just
to be hidden away, they are kept so that researchers can see the primary
materials of their research with their own eyes. Archives are meant to
preserve the records of history, but there is no use for history unless
people can learn from it. Archives must strike a balance between
protecting their collections while allowing, even encouraging them to be
used.

This balance informs every aspect of archival work, from beginning to
end. When collections are first appraised for addition to an archives,
among the questions that must be asked are whether the collection can
and should be preserved, and whether it will be of use. Some collections
are more tempting than others because or their rarity. The information
within them exists nowhere else, and so it seems all the more important
to preserve them so that the information will not be lost. Even so, the
question of use must be addressed. A collection may be rare precisely
because it is useless, and no one would use it. There is no sense in
preserving records that truly no one will ever want or need, a
description that applies to most records in the world. Rarity does not
equal value, of course, and an archives must consider if something is
both unique enough to *need* preservation, and useful enough to *bother*
with acquisition.

Both aspects come into play when a collection is processed, as well.
Some preservation work in necessary for nearly all collections, if
nothing else then to at least transfer them into acid-free folders and
boxes. Many of the most fragile items---those most in need of
conservation---require much more work, including chemical treatments and
being physically pieced together. Again, though, this is balanced with
keeping the records in a state that is usable. Records could be
preserved by each page being vacuum sealed in opaque, pH neutral
containers, and while this would certainly protect them better from the
ravages of time, they would not be very usable to a researcher. Most
records, those not especially fragile or compromised already, are
preserved in a way that is "good enough." They are kept in a cool and
dry environment, in rigid and acid-free containers, so that most
possible hazards are avoided while still keeping them readily available
for the researcher who needs them.

Once a collection has been processed and properly added to the archival
holdings, then the central conflict between preservation and use can
rear its head, when someone asks to use a particular item from the
collection. This is, of course, the very reason that the item was
reserved to begin with, but this is also when it is most vulnerable. The
archives must then keep a balance between accommodating the researcher
and protecting the materials, without treating the researcher like a
criminal or risking the integrity of the materials. Current archival
practice is usually one of *controlled* access, allowing researchers
access to materials under carefully supervised conditions. Researchers
are often allowed only one folder at a time, sometimes only one item if
they are at risk, and are kept under surveillance for as long as they
are using the materials. Here archival practice errs on the side of
preservation, as most materials are unique and irreplaceable, but even
so access is not eliminated or even much reduced, but it is controlled.

These practices have been the standard for years, but many aspects are
changing thanks to new technology as well as changing attitudes of
users. Harvey & Mahard (2013) describe the paradigm shift that is
occurring within archival preservation. Digitization is becoming more
and more common, though it is often limited by time and budget.
Digitization helps to fulfill both goals of preservation and access. A
digital file, after all, is usually much easier to access, and it can be
read without touching the original document, at least after the initial
scan. The researcher need not even be on the same continent as the
archives. Harvey and Mahard suggest that it is becoming much more common
to think of archival records as *documents* rather than as *artifacts*,
important for the information they contain rather than for their own
sake. Because of this, researchers are more likely to accept or even
demand a digitized facsimile, and are much less likely to put the
original physical copy at risk.

As well, digitization can help preserve a document even if the original
*is* lost or damaged. Though a digitized copy is not the same as the
original, and might lose some details without the original to provide a
physical context, nonetheless a digital copy with preserve the most
valuable information no matter what subsequently happens to the
original. Of course, digitization carries with it some preservation
problems, as well. A digital copy can only be accessed is it is in a
format that the user is *able* to access, the right kind of computer
file on the right kind medium with the right kind of computer or other
electronic device. Sometimes the original physical copy, as long as it
has been properly preserved, will be the easiest copy to access simply
because the researcher only needs to pick it up and look at it, no
computer required.

Archivists are now starting to react to not only how technology is
changing, but how users attitudes are changing in the wake of that
technology. Overholt (2013) calls for archives to embrace these changes,
in ways that bring use and access to the forefront as digitization helps
move preservation into the background. He sees the future of archives as
greater access with wider distribution, since materials need not be
brought out of storage in order to allow access. More than that, though,
he emphasizes the need to *encourage* this access, and to find better
ways to connect users to the information they need in an era where many
researchers begin and end with Google. In this atmosphere, archivists
should do all they can the lower any barriers to access, as preservation
without use is meaningless. In short, in the conflict between
preservation and use, use is the clear winner.

Not all archivists agree, of course, but they cannot deny that the world
is changing. Archives continue to preserve their holdings, not only
through environmental controls and chemical treatments, but also through
digitization and redundant backups. Archives encourage access not only
in the controlled setting of the reading room, but now also through
online copies and the web. While there are more ways than ever to
protect materials, it is also easier than ever to make them available
for research. While it has always been necessary to maintain a balance
between preservation and use, looking forward that balance is somehow
tipping on both sides of the scale, and allowing greater options for
both without reducing the possibilities of either.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Besser, H. (2013). Archiving aggregates of individually created digital
content: Lessons from archiving the Occupy movement. *Preservation,
Digital Technology & Culture*, *42*(1), 31â€“37.
doi:[10.1515/pdtc-2013-0005](http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/pdtc-2013-0005)

Harvey, R., & Mahard, M. (2013). Mapping the preservation landscape for
the twenty-first century. *Preservation, Digital Technology & Culture*,
*42*(1), 5â€“16.
doi:[10.1515/pdtc-2013-0002](http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/pdtc-2013-0002)

Kastellec, M. (2012). Practical limits to the scope of digital
preservation. *Information Technology and Libraries*, *31*(2), 63â€“71.

Overholt, J. (2013). Five tthese on the future of special collections.
*RBM: A Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, & Cultural Heritage*,
*14*(1), 15â€“20.

Watson, D. (2012). Preserving videovideo for posterity. *Multimedia
Information & Technology*, *38*(2), 30â€“31.

</div>
