---
title: Group D - Self Assessment of Bibliographic Instruction Package
class: LIBR 210
instructor: Cheryl Stenstrom
date: 4/24/12
...

It would not really be accurate to say that Group D decided to create a
blog for our Bibliographic Instruction Package. Rather, we experimented
with a few formats and sort of fell in to creating a blog as the medium
for our package. As it turned out, Tumblr was a fun and in some ways
ideal medium for instruction aimed at teens, though there is much to
learn in order to use it to its best potential. The final package is not
perfect, by any means, and there are many ways it could still be
improved, but it is the result of a great deal of hard work on all of
our parts and I am proud of what we accomplished.

Taken piece by piece, I think most of the blog works very well for its
intended purpose and audience. We were careful to keep each page
relevant and useful, while also being entertaining and accessible. Where
it falls down, however, is when it is taken as a whole. As it stands
right now, the blog is unfocussed. Perhaps the topic was too broad, or
the approach too inclusive, but whatever the reason, it never seems to
quite come together as a solid single package. Readers are left to
flounder through the whole blog, hoping to stumble onto what they need.
It lacks direction, and if it is to be an instruction package and not
just a collection of useful pages, it needs direction.

The assessment given by Group C was very fair, I would almost say it was
very generous, and I largely agree with it. They also found it to be a
bit directionless, and too broad in scope. They did criticise the idea
that it is targeted to both middle and high school students, feeling
that the material covered was mostly appropriate only for high
schoolers. I myself thought that it was only targeted at high schoolers,
and I wonder if a reference to middle schoolers was put in by mistake,
or if I am simply misremembering our group's agreement on the audience.
I did agree, though, that the blog needed more direction in the
navigation, to help readers and instructors to find where to start and
how it all connected together. I will admit to a touch of pride, though,
when they specifically called out two pages as well-written, and they
were the two I had written.

It was a strange and often frustrating experience to help create this
blog. I feel I have learned a great deal about how to target a web-site
or blog post to a teenage audience, and I had to learn to distill a
great deal of information into very small and accessible packages. I do
still think that the blog benefits from being self-directed, and if
anything needs to add more tools to help learners with different
learning styles to get the most out of it.

The most frustrating experience, for me, came from the disagreements and
outright personality conflicts that our group experienced while creating
it. In particular, one of the other members of the group often dominated
the direction that was chosen, and often dismissed our completely
ignored suggestions to do something else. This became especially
frustrating when the suggestions ignored were specifically the
suggestions recommended by you to help improve and focus our designs.
The other two of us wished to focus on a single subject area for the
writing instruction, but this last member insisted on covering writing
as a whole for high school students. Similarly, this member all but
refused to do any sort of presentation for the package, saying that they
were "too boring to high schoolers," despite the fact that a
presentation was described as a major part of the package in the
instructions. I do not wish to vent, or to attempt to lay blame on
another member of the group in the even that the package gets a low
grade. The creation of the instruction package often went in a direction
with which I was not happy, but in the group I was outvoted, and I
remain proud of the work I did in the end.

There remain many ways I would still like to improve the package, of
course. Most especially, I think the blog as a whole needs a bit more
direction. Readers who have never written a paper, or instructors who do
not have detailed knowledge of the site but still wish to use it, both
would need something to get them started in the right direction. I think
the blog needs a welcome page with a pathfinder, so to speak, to help
new users find what they need with no fuss and with no stumbling. This,
more than anything, would make the site more usable.

The other main to improve it, in my opinion, is to continue to add to
it. There are several gaps in the instruction for writing papers, and
these gaps should be filled. More detail on researching in the library
itself, for example. A page or two on the mechanics of writing and
revising, down to the word and sentence level. I would also like to
create more exercises for students to practice what they have learned. I
already created one, and have a second one on standby that has not been
posted because it stills needs editing. I think the blog could use many
more of those. Fortunately, these may still come to pass. The whole
point of a blog like this one is that it can still be edited, can still
be added to, long after it is first created. It is a perpetual work in
progress.

As I said, there are many ways in which this instruction package is not
what I would have done if left on my own, and many ways in which it can
still be improved. For what it is, though, I do think it is a well-made,
well-written, and still very useful instruction resource. It lacks
focus, but it also covers a great deal of ground in a fun, accessible
way. It needs direction to helo navigate its pages, but those pages are
themselves thorough and entertaining. Its not perfect, but I think it is
still very good, and the beauty of the medium we chose is that it can
always be improved even long after this class has ended.
