---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
csl: 'apa.csl'
date: Fall 2013
subtitle: A Review of Taylor from a Modern Perspective
title: 'User-Centered Question Negotiation'
...

As one of the core purposes of Information Science is to connect users
with information, one of the resulting core questions is to understand
how people search for the information they need, with many theories and
service strategies developed in response. One of the dominant voices of
the last several decades has been Robert S. Taylor, who was one of the
first information professionals to codify the information behaviors and
reference strategies that he observed in the field. His influence rose
through and after the Nineteen Sixties, and continues to this day, as
traced by Chang (2013). As he describes, Taylor's work marked a
transition point from reference theory that focused on information
systems and how they were used, to a mindset that focused on users and
how (or if) their information needs were being met. Though Taylor's work
continues to be used today, some of his ideas about information behavior
now seem limited, and this paper will review his work and how it can be
used in modern information science.

One of the first thorough analyses of both user information-seeking
behavior, and the methods used by information professionals in support
of this behavior, was in Taylor's article "Question-Negotiation and
Information Seeking in Libraries" (1968). One of the core theories
stated in this work describes four levels of information "need," or more
specifically how the user thinks of his or her information need. The
first level, described as *"visceral"*, in unconscious; the user has a
need for information, but is only vaguely aware that a need even exists.
It is at the second level, *"conscious"*, in which users are fully aware
of their information need, and begin to attempt to fulfill that need. At
the third, *"formalized"* level, users have put their need into the form
of a specific statement or question, describing precisely what
information they needs, at least as far as they are aware of it.
However, it is the fourth level in which this need usually reached
information professionals. Here, the information is *"compromised"* into
a specific question that is limited by users' experiences searching and
what they believe to be available and adequate.

This difference is important for information professionals, as it shows
how the question we are first asked is rarely the full question that
users need answered. Users almost always attempt to find information on
their own, only seeking help if they cannot find what they need
themselves. By the time they get around to asking for help, their
thoughts on the question have already been colored by what they have
found and what they have not, and by what resources they think are
available. They will phrase their questions in light of this, often in a
far more specific way than is really appropriate, out of a desire to not
seem ignorant and to not waste the librarian's time. A large part of
that librarian's job, then, is to draw out the real information need, to
ask the user clarifying questions that bring the query back up to the
third or even second level, so that we can understand what our user
really needs, and can then have a better chance of fulfilling those
needs.

Keeping this hierarchy of the consciousness of users' information needs
as a background, Taylor goes on to describe the common behaviors that he
observed among university students in their attempts to fulfill these
needs. He found that the students surveyed usually did not use any
formal search strategy, though they did employ some search mechanisms
they had picked up in their studies. Most of their questions could not
be answered with a single resource, and that their questions changed as
they found resources that partially answered them. As well, students had
difficulty immediately judging how relevant or useful any particular
resource would be, and that the search systems available had a lot of
"noise", extra information that gave no help in determining how useful
any given resource would be. Finally, he found that nearly all users
needed to use a human intermediary, a librarian or a more knowledgeable
colleague, for guidance in their search.

It is important for librarians and information professionals to
understand the actions that their clients have likely used to get to the
point of asking for their assistance, so as to better clarify what
information they really need. However, this section is less useful than
it could be, as it is less formalized or directed than the other parts
of the article, and only gives descriptions of what users *did*, with
little attention given to *why* they did things this way or how they
felt about it. More recently, Carol Kuhlthau has developed a more
thorough and directed description of this sequence of events (n.d.). She
connects the actions taken by information-seekers to how they think
about the information they are searching, from vague awareness to
focused interest, as well as how they *feel* about their search
experience, from uncertainty and initial optimism, to the confusion and
frustration felt when their searches are unsuccessful. Information
professionals would do best to understand this sequence to better
recognize *where* on the range their users fall at any given time, and
to better gauge what sort of help our users most need, as well as
determine when they are satisfied with the information we have helped
them to find.

Taylor observed that the actions taken by information-seeker on their
own is often similar to the strategy taken by reference librarians when
they interview users, in their attempts to determine the information
need. He described this in five "filters", questions librarians use to
narrow down the information need, though he acknowledges that real-life
clarifying questions often overlap more than one of these filters. First
and most obvious is determination of the subject, the actual topic of
inquiry covered by the question. Second is the objective of the inquiry,
the reason for asking the question, which is vital to understand if the
question is to be answered in the right way. Third is to understand the
background and context of the inquirer him- or herself, which is more
complex than it may seem. Often questions are imposed, with the user
asking the question only an intermediary who may not fully understand
the information need, so guesswork is needed. Fourth is more practical,
and that is to relate the information need with the actual systems and
resources available. This is where specific queries tailored to the
library's collection and search systems will be made. Finally, fifth is
to figure out what answers are anticipated or considered acceptable by
the user, which can often give a hint for the direction of research in
itself.

While this section is useful in that is gives a formal framework for a
reference interview and the information that should be determined in
order to best answer a user's information needs, it is somewhat limited
and outdated in the assumptions it makes about information
professionals. Here, librarians are seen as translators and
intermediaries, a gateway between the user and the information systems
available. This view by default sets us apart from our users, not
necessarily better but certainly separate. This could, in fact, serve to
alienate our users, to make them feel inferior, and thus less likely to
be fully honest with their information needs. More recent research, such
as that by Lundh (2010), recommends making question negotiation more
collaborative. We should be partners with our users, fully invested in
the information search while they are full participants in the search we
help them perform. In this way, patrons can feel that they can be more
honest with us about their information needs, and we will thus be more
capable of leading them to the correct resources available.

Taylor's work remains important, and a major influence on more recent
research, and with some caveats it is still useful for information
professionals who wish to understand how their users search for
information, and how better to help them find that information. It helps
us to understand how the questions we are asked relate to the
information needed, while helping us realize that those questions are
often not the entirety of the information needed. We can use the
article, and other more recent research, to figure out how our users
have tried to answer their questions without our help, and what has led
them to ask for assistance. The article is outdated, however, in that it
keeps us separate from our users, and should be used as a way to start
understanding information-seeking behavior, not as the end of that
understanding. We are partners for our users, colleagues who are there
to help, not overseers set above them by our better knowledge of the
library systems in place. With this change in attitude, we will be in a
far better place to get honest and full questions from our users, and
therefor be far better able to help tham find the information they need.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Chang, Y.-W. (2013). The influence of Taylor’s paper,
question-negotiation and information-seeking in libraries. *Information
Processing & Management*, *49*(5), 983–994.
doi:[10.1016/j.ipm.2013.03.003](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2013.03.003)

Kuhlthau, C. C. (n.d.). Information search process. Retrieved from
<http://comminfo.rutgers.edu/~kuhlthau/information_search_process.htm>

Lundh, A. (2010). Studying information needs as question-negotiations in
an educational context: A methodological comment. *Information
Research*, *15*(4), paper colis722. Retrieved from
<http://informationr.net/ir/15-4/colis722.html>

Taylor, R. S. (1968). Question-negotiation and information seeking in
libraries. *College & Research Libraries*, *29*(3), 178–194.

</div>
