---
biblio-files: '/home/jason/docs/school/references'
bibliography: '/home/jason/docs/school/references.bib'
class: LIBR 261A
csl: 'apa.csl'
date: '11/10/12'
instructor: Anthony Bernier
title: Filtering Internet Use for Teen Patrons
...

The questions of whether our library should filter internet access, and
if so by how much, are not simple to answer. While there are a great
number of opinions on the matter, there is so far relatively little
research on either the need or the effectiveness of internet filtering.
As well, though the common statement among librarians is that we should
not censor information in any way, in reality we must deal with the
wants and demands of our patrons, parents as well as teens. We must also
take into account recent legislation such as the Children's internet
Protection Act (CIPA) and how this law can affect our funding. This
paper is a brief overview of the research and my recommendation for
action for our library.

The first question we must ask is why the internet needs to be filtered
at all. The basic argument is that unfiltered internet access exposes
minors to harmful web content, usually pornographic or violent. An
opinion piece by Istook (2012), the author of CIPA, shows just this
argument, stating that children are constantly exposed to porn, and that
libraries should protect minors from that exposure. Losinski (2007)
shows a similar argument, mentioning that it is a major challenge to
filter all harmful websites. The unspoken assumption, though, is that
minors will necessarily be harmed by exposure to unfiltered content.

There is some research to support this assumption. Bryant (2010)
correlates several earlier studies that suggest adolescents show
increasingly sexualized behavior at earlier ages when exposed to
internet pornography. These studies also suggest that such exposure
leads young men to objectify women and adversely affects their
relationships with women, though these results are inconclusive. A more
detailed academic study was conducted by Tsitsika et al. (2009), showing
a correlation between teen use of pornographic web sites and social
maladjustment.

Other research contradicts these findings, however. Sven-Axel (2010)
conducted research in Sweden that suggested that, while teens were
indeed exposed to pornographic websites, this exposure had no effect on
their attitudes or behavior. Luder et al. (2011) also conducted a large
survey of teens in Switzerland, and again found no correlation between
exposure to "harmful" internet content and actual harm to the
adolescents involved. Clearly, there is still a great deal of debate and
research to be done on whether or not exposure to such websites are
indeed harmful to teens.

There are, however, several arguments made that libraries should not
filter internet access for teens. These fall into the idea that
filtering---censoring---any content is a violation of adolescents' first
amendment rights, as well as harmful to their education in itself.
Villano (2008), for example, argues that filtering the internet, in
particular the over-aggressive filtering that is most common in
practice, actually blocks websites that are beneficial and needed for
modern education. Many modern schools, libraries, and teen social groups
use social networking sites to coordinate and market their services, and
as well many genuinely educational sites are filtered out based on
controversial keywords and content. Many like Villano see this as the
greater threat than the possible harm to come from these sites.

Other researches suggest that better education about the internet is
more useful than simply filtering. For example, Krueger (2011) describes
how his school district uses an "open access" policy to allow their
students to use the internet unfiltered. They educate these youths on
potential dangers of the internet, and allow them to act as their own
"filters."

There is, however, another major argument for filtering, one that is
more practical than necessarily moral. The Children's Internet
Protection Act, or CIPA, was passed in 2003. As described by Menuey
(2009), CIPA requires all schools and libraries that receive federal
funding to filter their internet computers, even for adults. Any
institution that does not comply may lose some of that federal funding.
There have been many arguments against CIPA. The ALA and ACLU have both
fought against the law. There has also been at least one lawsuit brought
against a Washington State library challenging their implementation of
the law. So far, however, CIPA has been held up by the Supreme Court of
the United States as legal and binding. Therefor, it must be considered.

Based on the reality of CIPA, my recommendation is that we must
implement some level of internet filtering for teens. Our library
depends too much on the federal funding we receive to simply opt out. As
well, there is some evidence that unfiltered internet access can be
harmful to minors, and that many of the parents may want such filtering.
However, there is also much evidence that such exposure is not harmful,
and that the filtering itself may be too restrictive for teens.
Therefor, I also recommend that any filtering we implement should be
conservative, only filtering out the minimum required by the law, and
that there should be a policy in place to allow our patrons, adult and
minor, to access unfiltered internet content if it can be done within
the law. We should also revisit this policy often to keep up with
current research and possible changes to the law. Thank you for your
time.

### Search terms used:

-   web filtering
-   Web filtering AND teens
-   (internet OR web) filter\* AND teen (somewhat effective)
-   psychology AND teen AND porn\* (also effective)
-   CIPA (effective for finding arguments about the law itself)

<div class="references">

References
==========

Bryant, C. (2010). Adolescence, pornography, and harm. *Youth Studies
Australia*, *29*(1), 18–26.

Istook, E. (2012). Libraries need not expose kids to porn. *The Orange
County Register*. Retrieved from
<http://www.ocregister.com/articles/libraries-342133-children-public.html>

Krueger, K. R. (2011). Kids as your district’s content filter? *School
Administrator*, *68*(1), 8.

Losinski, R. (2007). Patrolling Web 2.0. *T H E Journal*, *34*(3),
50–52.

Luder, M.-T., Pittet, I., Berchtold, A., Akré, C., Michaud, P.-A., &
Surís, J.-C. (2011). Associations between online pornography and sexual
behavior among adolescents: Myth or reality? *Archives of Sexual
Behavior*, *40*, 1027–1035.

Menuey, B. P. (2009). CIPA: A brief history. *Computers in the Schools*,
*26*, 40–47.
doi:[10.1080/07380560802688265](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07380560802688265)

Sven-Axel, M. (2010). Teens, porn and the digital age. *Comtemporary
Sexuality*, *44*(9), 1, 4–9.

Tsitsika, A., Critselis, E., Kormas, G., Konstantoulaki, E.,
Constantopoulos, A., & Kafetzis, D. (2009). Adolescent pornographic
internet site use: A multivariate regression analysis of the predictive
factors of use and psychosocial implications. *CyberPsychology &
Behavior*, *12*(5), 545–550.

Villano, M. (2008). What are we protecting them from? *T H E Journal*,
*35*(5), 48–54.

</div>
