---
class: LIBR 261A
date: '12/08/12'
title: Visions of Youth
...

In today's world, teens are often marginalized or ignored, seen as
monsters, as sick, as broken, or as little more than children that need
to be protected. This attitude is nothing new, but rather it is deep
seated after decades or centuries of keeping teens separate from adults,
keeping them "less" than adults. The many problems of youth, the common
experiences of turmoil, violence, drug use, promiscuity, and plain bad
behavior, are often thought of as inherent to the lives of teens, but
recent research suggests that it is the other way around. It is this
attitude of "other," this separation, that caused teens to act out this
way in the first place. If this is the case, the best way to fix the
problems of youth is to first fix the attitudes of adults.

In his analysis of youth in today's world, Epstein (2007) approaches
this problem from a question of action. How can we make it all better,
both for adolescents who are living through this turmoil and for the
adults who have to deal with them? His answer is that the very idea of
adolescence needs to be be eliminated, and that youth should be
considered and treated no different from adults. He presents as evidence
data from history and from other nations showing that societies that do
not differentiate adolescents from adults do not have any concepts of
adolescent turmoil. He also presents evidence showing that when young
people are allowed adult-level responsibility, they respond with equal
competence as adults. His proposal for change is to remove all
situations in which people gain rights at a specific, arbitrary age, and
instead allow these rights at any age if the person can demonstrate that
they have the competence to exercise that right.

Skott-Myhre (2006) examines this same conflict from a perspective of
attitude and history. He asks how this attitude of division, of "other,"
came to be in modern society, and how it can be removed. His answer is
that it was an inevitable consequence of the Enlightenment and age of
Reason, which seeks to quantify and categorize everything and everyone,
and which classified (then and now) anything that is at all different
from the classifiers as broken and wrong, and needing to be fixed. He
shows the parallels between this and other types of categorization that
appeared during the same time period such as race and sexuality, and how
many of the same arguments were used to marginalize those groups as are
used to marginalize teens. He argues that this division will always
exist as long as someone thinks of someone else as "them" instead of us.
For the division between adults and youth, the solution is not for
adults to see youth as equals, but rather to think of adults in the same
way of youth, to examine them in the same light and see the
similarities, and from there to remove the barriers that the adult and
youth labels create.

Both approaches seek to trace the historical creation of this divide
between teens and adults, and eventually to eliminate it as artificial,
unnecessary, and damaging. Both call attention to the fact that the
modern concept of adolescence is a relatively recent invention, one that
did not exist a few centuries ago and still does not exist in many other
societies around the world. Both authors also see similar consequences
for continuing the status quo. As long as we continue to keep teens
separate from adults, the current problems between adults and teens will
keep going or get worse. They see conflict as an almost inevitable
result of the separation and marginalization of teens, but one that is
not necessary and can be avoided.

The differences between the two approaches are more subtle, and reflect
different underlying attitudes about the cause of this divide, though
they very nearly agree on the solution. Skott-Myhre (2006) traces the
historical roots of this marginalizing attitude to early attempts to
separate "problems" from the "ideal." Epstein (2007), though he
certainly offers many examples of attempts to quell "problem" youth,
focusses more on attitudes that teens are children that need to be
protected, most often from themselves. In some ways their differing
ideas seem almost political, with Skott-Myhre blaming capitalist
suppression and Epstein blaming liberal infantalization, though with the
same effect of keeping teens separate and "other." Their beliefs for the
solution, though on the surface similar, also show a difference in
attitude. Epstein wants to show that teens are equal to adults, while
Skott-Myhre wants us to recognize that adults are fundamentally the same
as teens. For one, teens are as good as adults, for the other, adults
are no better than teens. The result, though, is fundamentally the same.

I broadly agree with both authors that the prevailing attitudes about
teens need to be changed. I have known several teens to equal or
superior to most adults in any common aspect of "adulthood," and I
remember being a teen myself and thinking that I could and should have
the same responsibilities. I do think that Epstein (2007) sometimes goes
further than the evidence would really allow. In particular, his
assertions about child marriage and child labor seem weak. He repeats
the common stories that children married young in ancient and medieval
times, ignoring that these young marriages were usually arranged between
wealthy families (and not consummated until both were well into their
teens), and that the average age of marriage for most people was about
the same as today (Schofield, 2003)(). He also argues that most child
labor laws were passed at the behest of labor unions to limit the
workforce, without greatly acknowledging the very dangerous workplaces
and extremely poor economic conditions that led to these situations in
the first place. These labor laws have perhaps gone too far, but they
are not an evil in and of themselves. They were created not to protect
"infants," but to protect those with no power from those with a great
deal of power.

Libraries today have started to move away from the attitudes seen by
Epstein and Skott-Myhre, though perhaps not in the direction they would
like. The view that teens are dangerous beasts still exists, as seen by
the very large number of rules and zero-tolerance policies, but it is
starting to fall away under the backlash that it punishes for too much
for far too little offense. It has been supplemented, and in some places
almost replaced, by the view that teens are assets that can be guided.
Rather than monsters that must be changed into being good adults, they
are more like clay that can be shaped into better adults. This attitude
still keeps teens separate from adults, and to some extant still treats
teens as fundamentally less than adults, but at least the stereotype is
more positive than negative.

Libraries should see teens not as monsters or angels, but simply as
patrons, no worse or better, are really much different at all, than
adult patrons. In this I do agree with both authors. Teens, and even
most preteens, should not be a special case that is treated as
fundamentally different from and, inevitably, less important than
adults, but rather as full equals in every sense of the word. They
should be involved, consulted, and trusted just as much as adult patrons
are, and the only way that will happen is if the people of the library
see them as trustworthy, and worth involving.

Certainly, teens often have different needs and want different services
and materials than adults, but they should not be considered
fundamentally different. The best way to find out what teens want is to
ask them, to get them involved, just as adults are involved in the
selection of their materials. Teen spaces for materials should be about
keeping a collection and area for a group within the community,
regardless of what that group is. A library that serves a large Latino
population will likely have an area for Spanish-language materials, kept
separate so they are easier to find. In just the same way, libraries
should keep a teen area to serve teens, not to segregate them. Again, it
is about seeing teens as a part of the community to be served like
everyone else, not to see them as a group to be controlled so they do
not disturb everyone else.

Teens have been marginalized for centuries, as shown by both Epstein and
Skott-Myhre. They suffer from the fact that they have little power in
today's modern society, and the adult world sees them as either
dangerous or needing protection, often both, but never as equals ready
and able to join society at the same level as adults. That attitude
needs to change if we are ever to fix the problems that occur in the
battle between ages and generations. Libraries are one area where a
change in this attitude can have a direct effect on how teens are
treated and how they will come to see the world themselves. We must do
everything we can to not just treat, but to actually see teens as the
equals of adults, and give them the same respect and the same
opportunity to prove themselves.

<div class="references">

References
----------

Epstein, R. (2007). *The case against adolescence: Rediscovering the
adult in every teen*. Sanger, CA: Quill Driver.

Schofield, P. R. (2003). *Peasant and community in medieval england,
1200–1500*. New York, NY: Palgrave-Macmillan.

Skott-Myhre, H. (2006). Radical youth work: Becoming visible. *Child
Youth Care Forum*, *35*, 219–229.
doi:[10.1007/s10566-006-9010-2](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10566-006-9010-2)

</div>
